The main problem is neither diabetes nor BP.
Neither cholesterol nor obesity is the main thing.
The problem is doctors say lifestyle
Improve today the doctor will tell us exactly
What kind of changes should be made in the diet?
Bring it so that your diabetes can be easily cured.
reverse and you are out of this problem
Get sweet cravings if your life
I am there every day, so that is wrong, you don't say.
You can, I have a sweet tooth in our house
I will give one to everyone who has a sweet tooth.
Take only Mukka Chai Addiction Chai Addiction
It is needed across the country at 7:00 and 7:30.
Wanted at 34, that's a drug, cocaine, heroine.
Like his smell hits her
It's not easy to get out, a friend of mine
He eats everything, drinks alcohol, does everything
but he checked his reports in it
Everything went well, I drank alcohol regularly every day.
Will we take it every week or quantity?
If it remains more then gradually you will see that
Their fat is increasing in their body and their
The acid is also increasing and on their faces
Hair appears to age quickly
Heart attack and stress start appearing
So it's connected like this
bigger than smoking
Predictor of heart attack is high fasting
This insulin could be the Bible of diabetes.
After the podcast, people want to listen to something else.
No need to go anywhere else
Don't just come to execution
Only those people who have diabetes
Don't be bothered by its physical symptoms
But it is also very mentally torture.
It happens that this food is not allowed, that is allowed
Not with so many restrictions
no one likes to stay, some people
Have to take insulin shots regularly
Blood tests have to be done frequently
Medicines and All of This Becomes Very
Taxing in such a situation only one question arises
Can diabetes be reversed?
Or those who do not have diabetes think
can we put it away forever
The Good News Is Diabetes I'm Talking
About Type 2 Diabetes, it can be reversed
It doesn't matter what level you are today.
can go back to living a normal life and
Today we discussed a special topic
Invited diabetes reversal
This to specialist doctor Pramod Tripathi
Member of the American Diabetic Association
And he has many awards in this field
Dr. Pramod's best friend also met
It occurred to me that in the field of medicine
Even after this he only
Talking about medicines and medical treatments
Not for diabetes reversal
We shared a holistic approach and discussed
Did that to reverse diabetes
Or what kind of prevention
Life style should be basic to basic
Things like which flour to eat bread with
Which oil to use and which fruit to eat?
what time to eat and even how to eat
Food is what we talked about, our subconscious.
What is the connection between mind and diabetes?
How do we change our beliefs?
Can reverse diabetes and such
Things No One Else Will Tell You
Be Mind Blown After Listening To This
Podcast, now you just sit comfortably or
Then wear headphones and go out for a walk and
Enjoy this podcast together
[music]
Dr. Pramod welcome to the show and end
Thank you so much for coming here today thank you
For the invite so before we start i
Introduce you to our audience
I definitely give it to those who are listening to us today.
They are very health conscious people
want to improve your life style
want to improve your life
But at the same time they are the people who
Cravings for good food
I feel like eating sweets too
I also feel like eating outside and
Want to maintain a balance they want to have a
Balanced lifestyle which is by that is
Have come to the channel and are watching this podcast
They want it in a guilt free way
If someone could enjoy all these things
If you have diabetes, can you reverse it or
If we can stay away from diabetes then this is our today's
The agenda of the podcast will be today's in India
Nearly 10 crore people currently have diabetes
I have diabetes, yes it has been detected
Detect ho official and there is more behind it
135 crores which were not detected
who is diabetic and within a few days
Out of those 10 crores, only 235 will jump.
You hold on to the crores. Oh God, it's 25 crores.
If people have diabetes, it means that
at least one person in every family
If you have diabetes then today we
Some people in the family are listening and
If any one of them has diabetes then our
The agenda of this podcast will be to
How can a person cure his diabetes?
Right diet can reverse right life
By following the style, if
Is there someone in the family who is pre
Is sitting in diabetic stage or whose
Haven't been detected yet, who doesn't know?
If he has diabetes then he also needs time
Fix it through timely intervention
could do it and those who could not
Stay away, yes, those who haven't
there should be a little discussion about them
Because our observation is of 11 years
Has experience of diabetes reversal
They are on the way said in English
It means that they are on the right path.
Pre diabetes is just diabetes
Right now sugar is within 5.7 so feel good
It seems that there is no problem, so it's like
statistics
Hypertension comes from high blood.
pressure's ok in this 351
crore people have high blood pressure and
big statistics
So all I have to say is that this
The podcast we're doing is diabetic and
It is for diabetes reversal but
In Parihar, if the waist circumference is a little more
I have a little bit of hypertension and I have high blood pressure.
cholesterol and
Sometimes less people but hypothyroid
Or PCOD, they all have many benefits too.
You will definitely get it if you listen to the whole thing.
Of course that means a lot more to come
There is a lot to discuss in this podcast.
And today we have a medical field
If experts are sitting then it cannot get
Any better let's start with the basics and
Will go into deep dive so that people
If one does not get only surface level knowledge then
They know to a great extent about his
Revision will be done but after that exactly
What should they change in their lifestyle?
we say improve your life style
butt exactly
How everyone says doctors say
Improve lifestyle, doctor will tell us today
Exactly what to improve your eating and how
Bring changes from morning till night
What things should you do right so that your
Diabetes can be easily reversed and you
Get out of the problem, all right
If it is perfect then let's start diabetes.
What happens if I am very simple?
If I explain it in language then whatever we
When we eat food, it enters our body.
Break down occurs and ultimately glucose
Pancreas is then formed in our body
Beta cells of release insulin
Which we can say that i.e.
Insulin transports glucose to cells
Our cells get energy from glucose.
and we can do all our work
Now if this insulin glucose from any region
If he is not able to take it to sales then he
Glucose is the sugar in our blood stream.
And our blood sugar rises
happens and this is a diabetic condition
So it becomes very simple.
Now You Can Be a Diabetic in Lemon Language
Expert by elaborating it a little more
Explain first of all what is in our body
70 trillion sales means 12 in front of 70
Zero we are fine now it's like in sales
You said that life and body need energy.
The easiest energy to use
For that is carbohydrates of course
Now people don't know if glucose is okay
It's as if breakfast has arrived in the morning.
I am taking it as an example.
We don't take two spoons of sugar in tea.
Considering I'm not taking sugar
I am not diabetic, but later
Yes, that's why I'm not taking two spoons of sugar.
I am not taking it but when I have breakfast
The plate appears if it still has North
If you go south then let's go to Parado
This is how we all take upma, poha, idli and dosa.
There is definitely a plate of poha too if you
Take Which is Quite Common Hum Hum Vo Paanch
We have a spoonful of sugar and we also have a plate of upma.
spoon sugar is two idli also five spoons
sugar is one
Paratha 6 to 7 to 10 teaspoon sugar
Aloo paratha may be from Delhi
Yes, that much sugar remains, now the problem is
That there is only one spoonful of sugar in the blood
5 liters of blood in our entire blood
Gram means one teaspoon of sugar, we have this much
Now back to breakfast Poha Upma
idli dosa dhokla whatever
We are taking five to 10 spoons of sugar.
Even if we had those two spoons at breakfast
Have you not taken sugar in your tea? Come for breakfast.
It's gone, it's back in the plate, it's back in the plate now
She came down now like you said pancreas
Beta cells became active and
Insulin production begins in greater quantity
done four to five times sometimes 10 times
I have to make more insulin, what did I eat?
Right on top of that and that sugar with blood
By removing these 70 trillion muscles, 70 trillion
We are trying to put it into sales
As long as this work is being done properly we
The car is running fine but as soon as it turns 70
5000 to 10000 locks above trillion sales
There are receptors which you call keys.
Took insulin, this is the key, that key is somewhere
stuck somewhere called a receptor
Is or lock says it is 5 to 100 Hajj every
One cell above one cell above one cell then
70 trillion sales multiplied by 10000
you can do this much
Complicated's attempt is okay if that
where the insulin is sticking to the locks yes
And he can't open the lock properly
So that becomes the beginning of insulin resistance.
Or insulin resistance is fine and like
Resistance in body itself is 70 trillion
Sales will come as an adaptation age
Reaction body will make more insulin
Because hey don't put it on a spoon
spoon means 150 two spoons means 200 more
I have 10 spoons empty, right, 10 spoons
If it gets into your blood, you will go straight to heaven.
Because one roti also has five spoons
We have more sugar than two loaves of bread
Heaven can pass means yes 100th Hajj
can go but we don't go because
insulin
shaking it fast shaking it fast
That work is going on inside, now if there is a blockage
When I went there, my body got more insulin.
If you make it then you will say ok, it is made.
What difference does it make? Hey, it makes a lot of difference.
It happens because by producing more insulin we
A little more sugar, a little more fat
we have a little more fatty liver we have a little
more cholesterol we get a little more BP
start making because more insulin
It is what makes our body grow now
We have already achieved vertical growth, so now
Horizontal growth will start and pressure
It starts increasing, that's why in every house our
The point was from there that in every house one or
two diabetic will be pre diabetic
We are not pre diabetic
They will continue to feel diabetic, yes there is a problem.
Papa has it, Mummy has a little of mine
There's a little bit of me in my son and in my uncle.
It's yours too, you don't know it because you
I haven't even checked your insulin, right?
Night is the most important thing which I want in the beginning.
I want to tell all the viewers that the whole
family insulin
Meaning of fasting insulin by giving blood from here
When you haven't eaten anything, how much?
insulin check
Do it if it is between 2.6 and 6
thumbs up right if your over six
There is insulin and I am saying insulin ab
Nope, ok, sugar, it's not about average.
There is talk of insulin, okay?
If your insulin is above g and your
Everyone knows that HBNC is non-diabetic.
but under 5.7 for a recap
APC Non Diabetic 5.7 to 6 5 Pre
If your diabetic is above 6.5
If HBAC is also 5.5 then you are non diabetic
yes but if your insulin is 20 ok six
You can get four times the amount of insulin at your place of residence.
You are cooking something early in the morning when you
haven't eaten yet means you
But you are not in diabetic range.
you are producing more insulin which
maybe you
Hypertension, obesity and all those things
Adding now and gradually it
Will end diabetes also because number
So one or the other disease occurs first.
we call it hydra plant
Hydra is a plant under water.
It has 10 heads in the name of Dashanan.
It's like if you press one head, the other one pops up.
Lifts up, presses the second head, the third head
What does it mean to pick someone up first?
When the cholesterol pill starts, it
starts her statin pill in a few days
ke ba ba bp koi first bp pill on
Does because 31 crore are diabetic
31 crores is hypertensive so that BP's
starts the pill after a few days
Diabetes has come and cholesterol has come.
I want to convey only one point that in every household
insulin
Resistance syndrome is ok which we
Metabolic syndrome is called medical
All of you are perfect in language.
Become aware and check that your body
How much insulin is being produced if insulin
If you make too much then it will cause harm to you.
Can help you gain weight gradually
Fatty Liver PP Cholesterol Hypo
Which in thyroid also in liver
We convert more insulin into
not to do
And because of this, the thyroid hormones
T3 is not released from our glands.
t4 ts yes that conversion t3 liver of t4
If yes then there is no conversion.
If you get it properly then you will have ready harman.
You won't get that much, he will interfere, so
When you heal yourself and your family
If you want to do this then it is non diabetic
diabetic this is this
Do not divide mentally because all
Family is on the way is on the way is on the way
someone's number comes first
The number is there but everyone has problems
Can come so fasting is practical
from our our our podcast
First of all it is important to give practical tips
Medical Tip Checking fasting insulin
And keep it between 2.6 to 6.
If you are above then you may have sleepless nights.
I am using some strong words.
I am absolutely fine, it means to be strong.
We are here because of the welfare of our people
Of course we are talking about it, that's fine.
not at all you did a lot
said mind blowing things
First of all you said this very beautiful
Told and it was very important because it
There is a myth in the minds of some people that
Diabetes which we also call sugar disease
It is caused only by sugar, meaning that
Only table sugar or processed sugar
This happens due to eating sweet things.
It is important to understand that only if you do not have sugar
You can still get diabetes if you eat too much
If you eat too much cabbage then the way
You told me that in a plate of poha you
Are you taking four spoons of that palu paratha?
Look at it in this way so that only then you can portion
You will be able to control it, only then you will understand.
I will come to know that after going inside it will become sugar only.
Is it glucose that is being produced?
It was very important to visualize it to understand
Impact visualization is very important
Because when the plate comes in front of me
Let's see whether it is five spoons of sugar or 10.
spoonful of sugar yes exactly as that
Visualization will start.
Important word used is portion control.
Yes, you are eating us for test or
We are eating right for the portion.
Okay, I will eat sweets and Aloo Paratha too.
I will eat, I will eat everything, I want to eat everything.
How much according to your health
Eat according to the portion that is right for you.
So this thing was very good to eat
look at the plate like an x-ray yes and
Because after going inside he added sugar molecule
If you want to become one then understand that it is just me.
Don't think that I am eating healthy poha.
It is healthy but how much should be eaten because
Ultimately this is glucose so it is very
It was a good thing that you took that insulin.
Wala explained that it is not necessary that
You have diabetes but if your insulin level
If production is increasing then it is going somewhere
somewhere between your waist circumference and your
Cholesterol BP Hypertension due to this reason
If you have bad sleep at night, this is the reason.
It is only a matter of whether I am diabetic or not.
No, no, so this is very important.
thing and the third very important thing which
You told us that what we do with our insulin is
There are many tests that we should get done.
What frequency is important?
Let me give you an example ok many people
Work in corporates or companies
work in where there is free test
Our medical tests are free for them.
ok and they come exactly at the age of 35 38
Hey, last year we had 5.3.
The year was 5.2, how did HB become 11?
How could it not happen at all? How could it be eight at all?
So we explain to them that it is not at all
Happened
meaning gradually age after marriage
After 253, the weight gain will be reduced by half.
one kilo each
little by little muscle weakening happens gradually
Your body was a complex.
[music]
ok he said
Go now brother, it can also happen that
Our HBN C level is live now from Lets
With in range is less than 5.1 out of 5 and
It suddenly became more than 6.5 meaning
Suddenly a non-diabetic to diabetic range
It may take a lot of jumping directly
people like it, a lot of people like it
It seems and they get completely shaken up that
How did this happen, we are the ones who have to understand it.
As long as I was non-diabetic in my actual body
Sugar becomes non-diabetic due to excess insulin
but insulin resistance kept increasing
It was because the main problem was diabetes.
Isn't it BP? Isn't it cholesterol?
Obesity is the main problem, insulin is
Resistance, you have broken through a lot.
It has been said that actually our diabetic
Levels do not tell whether we are diabetic or
Then No There's a Lot More to It Absolute
Which is so important so crucial because
People get their test reports done
Let's see everything is ok let's relax yes
So it means that you are looking overweight and this also happens.
Actually this happens because many times
We say that I have a friend and all that
Eats, drinks alcohol, does everything but
He checked his reports and everything was fine.
Cholesterol is fine, it happens like this
If sugar is fine then tell him the same.
I have checked my fasting insulin.
Important Very Important Amazing Okay
so what frequency
Like HBNC does, every year you
Have to check fasting insulin and your own
Not only all the members of your family
who are diabetic or non-diabetic
Everyone's fasting insulin is checked once a year.
It has to be done and it is not an expensive test either. 200
It is a test of 250 00 and I think it is comfortable.
Everything would have been done in the labs and could have been done even after coming home.
Are you yes yes yes absolutely means one 200
If the 300K test comes to your house
By telling you this fasting insulin
Telling what level you are doing
I think if people are not doing it then why
Not doing it, definitely should do it, yes
Because he got so much popularity
It is not his and that has been our effort.
For many years we have been able to reach this message to the people.
Okay man, HBOC is important but
Fasting insulin is 10 times more than that
It is an important test, do it first
Exactly no thank you so much for this i
Opening Message in the Beginning Itself Ahead
I don't know what's going to happen, okay?
So now let's move on to the next step
We have always talked about type one
Diabetes and type two diabetes and beyond
Different types of gestational diabetes
etc., so once we
Let us briefly discuss what type one
We also call genetic diabetes or type
Like they say, because of lifestyle
So what is the main difference between them?
How type one and type two differ
Different is the word you just used.
Did that type one genetic is genetic
Mostly genetic type is lifestyle.
This is a very common misconception
It starts ok ok interesting
yes type two is that
Genetically we have inherited a little from our
We have inherited it from our parents because
If one of your parents is diabetic then 30 40
But you may also be type two type two and
If both parents have it, the chances are 60 to 75.
You may have type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes is common in people over 95
Those who are roaming around in the name of diabetes
Type 2 diabetic so at 90 9 90 to 95
Is type two 5 to 10 per lo ko jinko
He has diabetes, he is of type one. Yes, kinda.
1.5 also comes in between. Yes, about this.
I want to talk yes so type two
The Major Chunk We Are Their Insulin Resistance
The main problem is as we said and typically
Occurs after 253 35 40 years of age
Slowly first metformin pill
They turn on and then the pills increase
goes and then that long program
If you don't pay proper attention then
going back to insulin
95 people who are talking about type 2
Type 1 usually occurs in young children.
Yes and it is not genetic ok it is a viral
There is a reaction inside the body ok ok it is a
reaction auto
Immune is called auto immune meaning
Take Covid as a simple example
virus in the body in covid
The virus that entered didn't do much
As much as your immune reaction
Kiya means virus like cold virus.
but you considered it a big threat
Your immune system has killed so many soldiers
produced so many antibodies
Antibodies mean soldiers and then they go to your
Are damaging the lungs and don't know
what what what what what have you done so auto
Immune reaction which is in which your body itself
consider someone an enemy and act against him
Starts making antibodies against
That's what happens in type one and that's something
Beta cells which are autoimmune antibodies
which are pancreatic cells from
Insulin should be produced and starts killing them.
Ok so insulin in type one people
There is a problem of secretion, that means insulin.
Can't make it but it's by birth
Nor if a child is born and
Mother had diabetes, type one diabetes
And as soon as he was born, his wife
K beta cells do not produce enough insulin
If you are not able to do this then is it not so?
Two type one parents have normal children
Yes, this is also true, but it happens to everyone.
It's not true, no, not everyone has type one.
Area dependent on 3 to 4 less people
Few people have two areas but it is common.
Thought that type one is genetic so I
I am going to size it up a bit once.
Explain again that if type one
If it is not genetic then what is the reason for type one?
Viral antiviral reaction typically which
There is no cause, it is a reaction.
Against a virus but then where is that virus
Coming from and good environment in the
First Place What Das Virus Is What That
virus is
A there can be a reaction to many viruses and
There Are Many Viruses in the Environment Soy
Say it's just an environmental virus
Something caught from outside is a virus and
This is how our body reacts to that virus
Our pancreas is doing that insulin
No produce yes and parallel there
Is Many a Time Look the Only First of L
In type one it is said at 50.
idiopathic ok idiopathic means doctor is
An Idiot and the Patient is in a Pathetic
Condition I Thought Idiopathic
Some mail will not be deleted, all our texts will be deleted.
When we did MBBS in books,
Don't understand the first reason for them
It is idiopathic
idiopathic and its long form
To understand this disease that happens
The doctor is an idiot and the patient is in a
Pathic condition ok so most of type one
First you have to remember that there is no cause
It is Idiopathic at 50 Off the Times at 50
Of the Times It's a Viral Antiviral
Autoimmune Reaction in the Presence of Certain
foreign proteins
And That's From the Book Called Harrison
There is a book of a very thick MD named Harrison
OK it is written for example one off
The Commonest Cause of Reaction Against Milk
Protein reaction against milk protein in
The presence of a virus creates an
Autoimmune Reaction and Because of Milk
Protein Looks Like Beta
Sells It Attacks The Beta Sells That Beta
By attacking the cells the type becomes O.
My God yes, this can happen to anyone.
Then yes, does anyone get type one?
Bar type one, see their mother, father and grandfather
Grandma no one has diabetes but she
Dr has become type one and this is the region type
This is the real reason for One Diabetes Yes Yes
This is the real reason so oh dum because you
That genetic word was used, I was thinking.
that even in common language many people
It must be that he is from the berth, he is not from the berth.
3 years of age 5 years 8 years 10
In 12 years, in 14 years, in 20 years
Type 1 diabetes occurs internally, so this
How is the myth created that type one is genetic?
because it is said it's mostly it
Comes from your genes if mother has father
If someone has it then the chances of having a child are very high.
There is a lot of talking about type one.
I am so, why is this saying and what does it mean?
It's Not Just a Saying It's a Reality Age
Well where does that come from because
There is no treatment for him, OK in these terms
Off reversal type one to correct type one
If only beta cells die then
Insulin is not being produced, you are suffering from any disease.
Follow I Mean Allopathy Ayurveda
Homeopathy Unani Siddha Any husband who
Fibrous beta cell is where fibrotic means
Right fiber has arrived because it
Antibodies killed so much, killed so much
That beta cell is no longer there.
It became a fiber just like a skin.
Okay, is there an area of ​​skin where someone
hot thing in my childhood at my place
Right now maybe you won't be able to see a little in the camera.
There is a line here
You can see that right now here on fiber
If this is done then hair will not come here or that
The cells are dead. The cells are dead.
Right now it looks like skin
Looks like a butt, no hair can grow there
You won't sweat because it's actual
If there is no skin then there is actual skin.
There should be hair and there should be sweat.
There must be something athletic like fiber
Our beta cells are like this which are fibers.
He will not listen to any Pathi.
There is a separate test for that.
Peptide OK C peptide test has to be done
Type 1 Diabetic N and C Peptide
If it is below the page then you will get the label
Get normal symptoms of type one diabetes
Peptide is ok and food on forest
If it happens after dinner then it's okay.
Here's what type one diabetics should keep in mind
and Atlyst P4 if C peptide means
Pancreas is working at 40 g one is
Normal C Peptide HA Point F Will be at 40
If there are beta cells left then there is some possibility
If insulin is reduced by four or four
Toke ok but usually kya
It happens that people don't even know this
Not much attention is given to tests.
On a test called peptide and then for some time
After that antibody reaction continues
If he comes below Pf then he
Then people have to live on insulin only.
It comes to mind that there is no treatment for this.
Neither is it genetic and there is no treatment.
put it in genetics, just label it
Yes but I have given him a medical connection.
It's more of a common language
To understand, yes, put it in genetics.
Because genetics cannot be treated
People understand that genetic means we can't do
Nothing will happen in this like this and so on
Health professionals also have this misconception
Some doctors also have this misconception.
It is a common misconception. Yes, it is a very common misconception.
Which is not true so anyway we go deep enough
I got into the type and I but it's good in a
They don't but it's good if people know
How will I know if it will work the other way?
If we come to your clinic with you
You sit and chat with them like this
You won't kill, it doesn't matter in such details.
If you don't spare time today,
Take all this knowledge from you through podcast
What they can do otherwise they will not get it.
If it's easy then why not type 2
Like you said it could happen if
If parents are there then our chances double
If both parents have it,
There are chances at 70 and there is one in that too.
It is a very interesting thing.
genetics is second
epigenetics
Ok so in general thumb rule if you all
has to explain to the audience that what usually
We are suffering from diseases out of which we are 20
But we can blame genetics
Epigenetics happens at 80
Meaning, around your DNA
Electromagnetic OK radiations occur
One is its ring and one is its rim
epigenetics that we know from our
From lifestyle to our thoughts
Can be influenced by stress
can influence can influence
You can be awesome because you are type two.
We can reverse and prevent
You can definitely make excuses for people
I often wish that both my
My parents had it and I inherited it.
Diabetes is bound to happen when you have it.
When patients come, this is a common meaning
yes you can say excuse
yes what should I do what should I do then in that
What happens is that this table as it is now
The dining table of the house. The dining table of the house.
You have inherited the habits of Yes, right?
Isn't it
Yes, there is a style in North India, East
India West India has different style
There is a different style in South India and each
Dining table habits that affect us
Meet mom, dad, grandparents
There is something very powerful and good in it
There are things and some things are off track
You have got those habits of dining.
Those excesses at the table will make you sick
Don't just blame genes for doing so.
to do and there are many good books too
Like there's a great book on top of this
Biology of Belief OK Biology of Belief
Biology of Belief in the name itself sounds like
Biology of belief means my belief.
What is psychology, belief, subconscious mind
The thing is that there is a thought in it
And the thought which you repeat again and again
Whether you say that this is the truth or not, it becomes
My belief means my belief has become
Thought is equal to thought, belief is equal
I have assumed that my
Diabetes will never be cured so it's okay brother
Have you ever cured your diabetes?
It won't happen, even the doctor told me to take the pill today.
I have given you this in writing, now how far will this go?
This will last till Vaikuntha.
Goli Kuch Kuch Dialogues Yes
Actually this is all neuroscience
In which whatever thought we think is then
Those are the cells of our body and our entire being.
Circulation Everything supports that thing
And we start feeling like that
Absolutely and then it turns into reality too.
If it changes then that is epigenetics that is
Epigenetics is just like DNA
Let me give you a simple example like I just did.
This blazer is worn by me above
Now I have assumed that this is my DNA. DNA
There is a chromosome on which it is written
We are fine with diabetes and he is in a dormant state.
Is dormant because the DNA of diabetes
Jeans are dormant.
We are not like the color of the eyes.
Like someone's eye color is blue
Some are green, some are dark brown.
someone's black eye color is dominant
The gene is dominant gene, meaning it will definitely be visible.
Meaning if your parents or grandparents
If someone did not have blue or green eyes
It is not possible for you to be there too, yes correct.
Eye color is a dominant gene and diseases
The maximum that exists these days is that everything is dormant.
Biology of belief is now asleep
What does the biology of belief mean?
So your belief, your diet, your exercise, your
Many people are stressed for six months.
I was stressed for a year and then got diabetes.
It is also common for people to get stressed at the age of 30-35.
If diabetes is reduced after
what's happening is that whatever
Electromagnetic changes are taking place
We inside the body, we and them inside the body
The cell membrane that is moving around outside
It means the outer area of ​​the muscles.
It is called membrane, the largest
The brain is the cell membrane outside.
The area that covers the cell is its
The membrane on which we started is called
I said there are 5 to 100 Hajj locks.
That which is the outer covering which is the muscle cell
Membrane is the most intelligent organ
The most intelligent is the one without nucleus
So the cell takes 48 hours and 22 hours also.
But it cannot survive without cell membrane.
Any cell has many cell membranes.
Important here in the cell membrane
If Bamberg Ment occurs through wrong diet
Wrong exercise stress hormones and
Actually hits our thoughts too
There are different neurotransmitters
And Chemicals, what is going to happen then?
The membrane will release a protein and that
the protein that covers it
regulatory by interacting with it
It is said that the protein will uncover it ok and
Then Diabetes Express will be AGE AS A
Genetic Vat U Se Manifestation Vo
Express will be behind this
Meaning, turmoil occurs so easily in the body.
No but good news, it's all technical
Medical heavy things have become, this is not medical
You took him to a different train.
Completely different meaning on Neuroscience of Diabetes
had taken
Manifestation and Mindset Behind
He was suffering from diabetes
Biology that book by Dr. Bruce Lipton
hai harvard medical cellular
Biologist means written by biologist
I did not write this, I did
Have read and understood but good news is we can
Switch on the gene We can switch off the gene OK
OK Derman Offcourse with Life Style Correct
In fact, let me give you a simple example.
when people go on vacation
go for a trip to Europe or
Went to hill station, now eat whatever you got there.
I am eating white rice and also eating flour.
I am eating pizza and I am also eating sweets.
Yes and said sir my sugar is coming good
coming normal
This does not mean that you should eat absolutely healthy food.
I am fine but my sugar is coming normal.
I don't understand how this is happening
There is medical science behind it too, why?
And this is very shocking, people.
How is this happening? A spoon in the blood
There is sugar. There are 20 teaspoons of sugar in the liver.
Muscles have 100 teaspoons of sugar in a day
We eat 30-40 teaspoons of sugar in general.
We usually keep mobilizing.
We keep moving the sugar, we're coming back
To that interesting point that on Sunday
sugar is fine with me diabetic talk at home
I am doing it, my hum is coming a little less.
As soon as I go to office on Monday
It is also common to go from Sunday to Saturday
There was no office, my BP is under control.
BP increased on Monday, this report
Medical We see patients day in day out
We see outpatients, that's why we are telling you.
Have you gone to see the doctor? We will be at home.
Your BP was normal as soon as the doctor said
Started checking, your BP increased
This is very common white coat syndrome
That's why I wear a little white coat
avoids
I am a little worried now after seeing all this.
Seeing the white coat of doctors increases
White coat syndrome slightly increases BP
His name is the same, yes, it's just B.
Is it for BP or any disease
Typically B is for BP because
b bp responds immediately
Instant heart beat becomes faster
Immediate BP increases whenever we
When I come into a stressful environment, I
Yes Yes Do Concept Yes with these examples
I want to tell you about one medical concept.
inflammation
inflammation insulin inhibition we were talking about
insulin resistance what we were talking about
Main reasons and when we come to tips na diet
Then she will understand better
One of the major areas of insulin inhibition is
Is Inflammation Acid is in the body and
As soon as we leave we and
It is in nature and people have to visualize it.
Looking at us but visualizing in parallel
Can we go to Switzerland or Kashmir?
Did you go to Vadiya or Mussoorie or somewhere in Munnar?
And you are in those mountains yes and there is water
And you just mean go there and relax.
Are you feeling we are right in this
What is your inflammation in 24 hours?
We can switch off whatever genes we have.
one day
inside our body in one day
Inflammation may be reduced because
The swelling that will remain and the outer membrane there
The swelling will remain and then it will lock properly.
won't work and gives a simple example
When it rains we and if you
The door is your door if there are windows
They are made of wood and if water gets inside them then
She swells, swells, and then she opens.
Your rights will not be closed soon like this.
If there is excess acid in the body, we
The reason is that the locks do not open and close quickly.
If we are there, your sugar will increase quickly.
Got gut ok and went on leave then acid
become less
Body means like a balloon, right?
Fush Deflator The cells that were inflated
were them
We relaxed the fast and drank sugar quickly.
When I started going inside, I started going.
Ate some flour, ate some biryani, some
If sugar is normal even if you eat pizza then this
So this means that our life
Is it our style or our stress?
The role is bigger than our diet
is in some instances to some in some instances
In some ways of course I'm not saying
That's everything, diet is there, but if
Are you diabetic and take care of your diet also?
Been on top of it if he's like this
Minimizes stress from
Inflammation of his body's organs
If it is reduced then it is multiplied.
You can get results immediately
Don't you call that hitting the nail on the head?
That means you absolutely hit it with a hammer.
is killed here because
One of the major factors behind increasing inflammation
Region is stress one of the major region e
Stress so they are sitting comfortably on Sunday
Wake up comfortably in the morning and lie down comfortably even at night.
Okay, I got some sleep, etc., etc.
Tomorrow sugar is fine and BP is also fine.
I am going to office on Monday just thinking about it.
Anxiety, anger, those targets just by thinking.
Boss is the face of people with whom one gets along
It cannot enter the atmosphere because
Office is also an atmosphere
There is an electromagnetic field there
Those Monday morning blues are about to enter
This happens a la Maximum Heart Attack Monday.
When morning comes, you will know this too.
Is
yes o
Gad Maximum Heart Attacks Monday Morning
It comes because it is stress heart attack
And stress is so closely related
There is a lot of stress involved.
increase inflammation increase and this we we
To control we can take off our jeans
Can do this even in 24 hours
The main messages I want to convey are
Will be very relevant in type 2 diabetes
OK in type one because if insulin
If you are not making it then it is difficult to recover.
Rat butt type two that you in people at 95
That means you can catch the bull by the goose.
It means like you say 'you' to a bull.
You have decided to catch him first, if you
You will not be determined that I have to get well.
They are not the same people, Papa Kotha, Mummy Kotha
I will too, my doctor said
Gole divan had to be taken hey if you are right there
If you are stuck, how will you get a vehicle? If you and
If some people are inspired by this podcast
After that he will decide whether he will catch me or not.
Bull by the horns, I want to be uprooted
I want to get rid of type 2 diabetes from my body.
So you can do it, thousands of people can do it
16000 people have been killed so the bullet has stopped
Look at everything we have.
Give a little time, patience is the biggest thing.
The thing is to believe, yes, keep your belief.
The first thing I have to do and I do it
I can, it's absolutely under my control.
Now you will get the solution yes because then that
your eyes will start searching
youtube2 diabetes big time right big time
Even after eating 15 spoons of sugar, it brought normal sugar level.
Many diabetics who have been suffering for 3030 years
had diabetes
And in between these two are type one and type
comes between two
1.5 1 so 1.5 is someone between both so
Between one and two, 1.5 is the main one.
Lada has latent autoimmune diabetes in
Adults who are progressing a little slowly
Like Type 1, he is okay inside too.
Antibodies are there but due to age yes yes
After 30 years it is usually ok and one
I have a younger brother who is called Madi.
Maturity Onset Diabetes of Young But It
I would say it's a bit for the doctor to decide
Let me know which type you have and what is it for you.
as much as needs to go
No, you just insist that I have to get better now.
Let us tell you his direction on how to recover.
You may suffer from many diseases such as diabetes and
Also comes in the scenario for example
I was studying somewhere during my pregnancy.
Was
That data after pregnancy means up to a year
According to Moms at 50, New Moms
Is there a risk of getting diabetes?
What is the reason for this? It's like type.
To diabetes only we her name gestational
Diabetes is sudden growth inside the body
Weight gain, fat gain, resistance gain
Because of this many ladies have to go to second trimester.
Or it happens in the third trimester
Goes into stage after delivery and
May come back again after four-five years
This is called gestational diabetes but
You Can Equate It to Type Two Diabetes
Only because if everything in the body
If you are already in imbalance then you are pregnant.
And there is going to be imbalance, we are this common
So it's a butt, is it normal? Is it normal?
Why would you say it is not normal right now?
Our Grandmother Supposes If I Just Take 51
Right now I am years old and people of my age
There are also people, he told his mother
It has been seen that even at the age of 70-80 years
Still working, busy in the kitchen
And you know how to feed and
Grandma, we are probably the generation right now.
No right they have all gone to them
Minimum four five children six seven eight children also
Common were right, I mean, my grandmother's
Whatever age grandmother came, yes yes yes
Where did they all have diabetes?
What does normal gestational diabetes mean?
Don't you want to make a wrong belief again?
You were speaking very casually, weren't you?
That's why I do this and this and I break down
Wanted to do that means datchi
Now also I mean this thing
Have observed that people who are into fitness
There are women who follow ladies fitness.
She does all this even during her pregnancy.
His reports are perfect
Diabetes does not cause any infarcts
Things like postpartum depression
and whose lifestyle
It is unhealthy for someone who is pregnant
She takes the excuse that now I can't do anything.
Now I eat too much fat.
They don't think whether I should eat this or eat that.
have all these problems too
If this is true then it is very important to understand that
You should eat healthy food during pregnancy.
And the butt is important for your baby.
Potion control is absolutely necessary there too
Infact is more important otherwise this
We are talking about gestational diabetes
Its risk will increase and you may suffer for a long time.
Will have to travel and as you have written
Told that gestation means being pregnant
The first 5 years of what you were doing right if
You gave importance to fitness during that period.
A reasonable weight, a reasonable workout, a
If you have followed a reasonable diet then you
Gestational Diabetes Will Not Happen Like It's Like
Type 2 diabetes only but if you
The environment of body and mind is not right already.
Your BMI is a bit high you know 25
Above is Already BMI Before Pregnancy
Your U Know and Exercise in Fitness
If you haven't done anything for many years then
Chances are going to increase so all the ladies
Who are pregnant and who are planning to be?
Pregnant in future, from now on you can start your
If you start taking care of fitness then you
During and after pregnancy
There will be no problems at all
Infact whoever comes to us anyway
Patients come because they see mom
Results in mom, mom, dad, mom
The insulin has come and the pills have stopped.
Something has happened, then she is pregnant.
If planning has to be done then it is ours first.
First three to six month cleanliness
Well, complete cleanliness means complete cleanliness of the body.
Take out the garbage inside and alkalize it a little
fast yes first you get ready
Your system for getting pregnant
Let It Become Ready Exactly
At a normal state at a neutral state
bring us to a healthy state
Come to the Healthy State! Come to the Healthy State!
Bring and then because your body also
I mean, it's very taxing.
The phase of pregnancy it is going to be
Very taxing, how much is yours?
inside the body of course for that first
Strengthen all your organs
Check out all the vitamins in the reports
take a second look and then think about it
Then there will be a wonderful child and a wonderful pregnancy.
It will definitely happen and you will also be dazzled.
You will be surprised even later because of that post.
Partum dip is also connected very very
Rightly You Said It Like a Lady So
Debunked the myths of Datchi and understood
Learn what actually happens
People have listened carefully, they are far ahead
There were many uncles who have passed away.
I don't know type two very well.
We did a deep dive into this gestational
Another aspect about diabetes
Let's discuss who is pre-diabetic
There is a stage, yes, so this is above it.
Can throw a little more light that it
People who are in pre-diabetic phase.
remain confused because right now we
I don't have diabetes, but it's not like that.
We are free pre diabetics
Wherever you are hiding, know this through research.
According to pre-diabetic at 50
Already heart blockages have started
ok 50 over 50 me pre diabetic over 50
That's why pre-diabetic people said where
They are hiding because they are under the cover of pre-diabetes.
I hide myself and that's not right
50 out of 50 are pre-diabetic
Heart blockage would have already started
Because the problem is insulin resistance
And that too when their insulin level is checked
Will insulin level remain increased
100%
Guarantee and the same insulin causes heart blockage
does because the more insulin
If it causes more growth in the body then
The growth that occurs inside the arteries of the heart
That's why he gets more insulin.
In reverse for those with pre-diabetes
Yes, I give more warning because
There are many people in India who have heart attacks.
come between 35 to 45 and they
They are not diabetic either
Are you diabetic or non diabetic?
are there but they all have very high insulin levels.
More remains and a matter of research
A bigger predictor of sleep than smoking
Heart attack is due to high fasting insulin
Fasting is worse than smoking
Insulin Not Sugar High Fasting Insulin Joe
We are talking from the beginning if insulin
If the level has increased then it can give you a heart attack.
There is a bigger reason behind this than smoking.
there is a bigger reason
So pre diabetic also declared himself diabetic
We have to understand that this is the entire conversation.
I feel like there's a road to
Hell which is like and of which is now
That You're Diabetic and Now You're Going
To Face the Consequences Is What I Am
From trim 2 onwards, all of us were on that road
Currently yes, now it depends
where are you yes either you absolutely
Almost there or somewhere in the middle
Are there or are they still left but in the journey?
If yes, then quickly take U-turn and live your life.
Improve yourself otherwise you will end up there
So the saying in our company is either you
Either you are diabetic or you are going to be
You are the one who knows the road to hell.
I am diabetic and the other one is a little overripe.
Third dance considers himself pre-diabetic
I am saying that I am non-diabetic.
I am doing a test, if the test is correct then it is ok.
If not then be careful be careful india
Is that why they call him diabetic?
Not much capital is being built in India
Not all health problems come just like that
Due to these reasons it is coming to an end
We Have to Be Conscious and This is the Reason Which
so many late now
Even unfit people have had heart attacks
Meaning people who take care of their diet
But still pay attention to physical fitness
he has a heart attack
so in them
What has been found is one of the unknown causes.
Stress Hum OK and Inflammation Again Joe Hum
Like were talking about two things
Suppose you are not sleeping well
Yes, it's okay, you can't rest properly.
We are here and yet you run the marathon.
Are you there? Was there any recent case within 100 km?
Cycling Every Day for Some 1500 Days So Fit
Right in Bangalore
Khalas finished
100 Heart Stuck 100km Cycling Every Day
1500 more days
Something to Access
Exercise suddenly done and continuously done
without addiction
Rest Can Also Trigger Inflammation Yes Here
Stressing Your Body So ​​Much It's Also
Stress x also stress plus emotional
Stressful Late Nights Some Times
Alcohol and Other Intoxicants and That
Invoking things that cause inflammation
The few blockages that occurred
Dissolve becomes okay in that stressful
environment and get stuck further or
Blood is our blood. RBC is red blood.
Cells are everything that is acidic.
It gets clumped in the environment
Meaning they start coming closer RBC
In an acidic environment
They roam freely in alkaline environment
That's why we are in alkaline environment
Cancer doesn't even happen and Nobel for this
The prize has already been received, Hum Hum and 1950
I am yes so alkaline environment we
This has not reached every home, no
is reaching and nowadays our bodies are highly
Acidic is absolutely too much acid.
is present in the body and due to many reasons
is increasing
right right night we just a little while ago
We were talking and you were very interesting
explained to him in a manner as if one of our
The internal environment is our cells
Our body organ all functionally one of our
There is an external environment through which it is defined
How will our health be if we
If I talk about the specialty of metro cities
hustle bustle stress anxieties rush office and this
Stresses in our fast life
there are more stressors, there are more
and hence all these are lifestyle related
Diseases also increase if we
change the external environment or if
We do some work like this at hill stations.
If you go to a place and stay there, is it true that these
We can control diseases to a great extent
Can give the fact that all the rest of our
The basics are fine but if we look outside our
If we change the environment, it changes our lives.
To fix style related problems
I get help at all so can we do this
Can say those people who have diabetes
victims of hypertension blood pressure obesity
He takes out time whenever possible.
Once in six months Once in a quarter
go to a place like this where a little
There should be peace and peace, spend some time there
Go with your family, this will help them
You will definitely get Jabar Adeno from We Can.
Pectin will increase inside them ok a special
Chemical increases in areas where you are and you
Are Quiet and That is a Very Powerful Anti
Inflammatory
signal molecules and nowadays also started doing
I Think Younger Generation Is Understanding It
I think those are very important
Decisions of life because everything is in the end
For those who are about to go,
frequency
Furniture The Choice of Colors Curtains Question
There are sofas, they are in such a way that they
To your mind, to your health, to psychology.
Make it a little peaceful, can we say that?
Yes from Absolute and Greenery from Greenery
Bring home some extra greenery or
There Are Many Things to Be Done by Us and a
It's Important That They Go Deeper Meaning
Go a little deeper and do a medical test and
From well qualified medical doctor
Baba Holistic after consultation
By taking holistic consult because only
Just change this pill, just change that pill.
Supplements are not going to change
also has a lot of role in the end of the body
If food is body then role of diet is important.
remains tremendous in the beginning we see
Then the stopper was rolled once because
There are only two roles in the diet, two or three roles.
Has a role that slightly alkalizes the body
Do the right thing, reduce acid and then diet accordingly.
You can change it like I say
That you wake up early in the morning by eating tea and biscuits.
muaa healthy awesome
[Laughter]
Drink a half glass of smoothie
healthy
Say something like this, eat oats and have some smoothie
Pecker Green
Don't walk 10000 steps even in juice size
The whole world is healthy and terrible.
Little Strength Stamina Flexible Trio
Healthy only by balancing
Hoe and it can go on and on it can go
And then see Kabira
I cried after seeing the doctor
Cried because what's wrong is the beginning
It means I have tea and biscuits in the morning.
Sugar will increase as quickly as glucose.
That much acid will be produced in the body.
Fat is also an acid, so first reduce the acid.
Take some alkaline food for
Then food plays a role in fasting.
So that extra weight can be removed but food later.
Our role is to build body
Yes, it means changing from a fat cow to a thin cow.
Changing from a lean cow to a strong horse
Becoming a mare will definitely play a role in diet.
Of course, it is important to do that too because it is very
Everyone, have you lost some weight?
Will you follow any diet for now?
Actually everyone's focus is only on weight loss
pe yes yes yes yes that strength ning pe
Muscles are not focused on things that
That is the right approach which should be done but that
If you do muscle building quickly then
Acidic body also causes more injuries.
And we don't even get results, we are very common.
Let's see the people whose even simple if
Vitamin D is low, even a simple thing
Weight loss doesn't happen quickly either.
Even if energy production is not possible
Medical attention also has to be given to the body
Alkalize, clean, then crush
Build it and change it accordingly
Because people we see that a diet
would have married
This is the only diet and it is like this and everyone else
Do this for us all over the world
[music]
Can't even apply RealLife Equally
And follow the same diet for a person throughout the year
Say it or say it all your life, can't keep it
Absolutely absolute so learn in it
Looks like you have to become a good student
we the thing which we see because
Many people join programs and we
people progress well that's that
who have a student mentality
Right, what is this fasting insulin?
What is acid inflammation? This is due to stress.
How is the effect happening in the reports?
How does it look in discussion?
Become interested and delve deeper
Ok let's try this exercise
You told me the world's best.
Lakhs of people have treated me as doctors
promo tripati world best firm up
will put
youtube2 gets inflated and gets completely frustrated
If we do, what will be its effect?
When you start understanding what a good student is
Whatever you do, it will happen if you have the right attitude.
Not just to do it, not because the head
But the stick is where it is, you have to understand it.
Do it in a calm manner so doctor I
I was reading somewhere that people over 50 are those people.
Who doesn't know he is diabetic
Already like we did pre diabetes
The point is that they don't know but they have
Like a hidden diabetes is happening to him butt
They have no idea, in fact I have one of my own.
I will share a personal example with my friend.
there is an aunty
He was in his 50's as of today
It was a few years ago and their teeth
I started having problems, his teeth became loose.
When he started falling, he went to the doctor for this reason.
went and the doctor suggested that you
Get your blood sugar checked, you may be diabetic.
could and when he got it checked
The sugar that came was 500 plus I my God.
straight and how was it detected by their teeth
I have had a problem with that figure before, right?
Couldn't get out problem so many like this
There are people to whom when any problem
It happens that they go to the doctor, the doctor
It is said that you have done blood test and reports.
They come to know only when they get it out, but till then many
It's too late right now
There are some ways in which people can sit at home and
Those who have some science or symptoms which
He could guess that we have one
Did you report your reports regularly?
Get it done, that's it, but nothing else.
visible sign symptoms
Like some things have frequency
If you see anything like this then
You immediately mean it can be due to high blood.
Sugar and Go and Get Yourself Checked
Correct, like you said, among people over 50.
Simtums ji does not come directly
Medical report shows but
Its trigger like dental infection here
Did anyone have urine infection?
If you have skin infection
Infections are increasing in the body or
After infection skin becomes slightly black
If the stain is alive then there are chances that
Your system is heading towards diabetes.
Point number one in skin and one important
The thing is black marks pigmentation
Pigmentation in which Anthos Nagari Kansa Jo
Now it is being found quite a lot even in children
A little blackening around the neck
If it starts happening, it will happen, then there will be a level in it too.
If it happens till here then level one then
Here comes level two level three ok them
It looks like dirt but it doesn't stay dirty
Actually black neck is black armpits
Black color also starts appearing in the armpits.
And all this high fasting insulin
does what we saw in chapter number one
Tha To Akan Tos Nagari Kansa A Meaning Even
Nowadays among the children of 8th, 9th and 10th class
which is visible
OBG little kids or husband at home
Wife died today
Don't look each other in the eyes
speak a little show me your neck
and after turning around a bit and looking at their necks
Tilt your neck a little bit
Tilting has to be done on the back side and then
Want to see if the black line is coming?
It is a very important sign because
This is where the black line comes from
why does this happen
biological
Is
pigmentation that causes excess insulin
There are basically these folds in the folds.
There is a fold, sometimes there is a fold here.
There it starts becoming more third
The simplest would be the measuring tape.
Pick up a measuring tape at home and measure your navel
Measure 1 inch below what is your waist.
If the girth and waist circumference are here then let's go
I am taking 36 for example so give it to him
Multiply by OK then it comes to 72.
Your waist circumference is 36 inches, divide it by two
If you multiply 72 inches you get a number
Got 72 inches, you will break them into feet.
Ok 12 inches is one foot so we have 72
inches divided by 12 becomes 6 feet
So if your waist circumference is 36 inches then your
Height should be at least 6 feet ok o
Simple, if you are 5 feet tall it means you are 8.
If your height is in inches then waist circumference is half of that.
30 inches inside ok so the simplest test
And this endocrinologist made the device
The simplest zero investment test was done
That's your waist circumference 1 inch below the nucleus
Check whether your waist circumference is equal to your height.
Keep your central obesity under half.
Insulin solves central obesity
The more insulin is connected to
Your stomach will come out as much as it will remain.
You move towards diabetes more slowly.
We are the ones plus you who are the rest of the references.
Was giving one minute on the remaining references
Before leaving I request everyone
Would you guys like to do a video for a minute?
pause and what the doctor just said
You have shown the calculation in your phone.
Calculate and then in the comment section
Go and type how much is your circumference.
If you want complete calculation then do it there.
How tall can I be and how tall am I so that when a
If you write it down in the comments then you will
It will be remembered forever after listening to it.
If you go then one thing will slip out of your mind.
If I write again then it will always be there for you
You will save it in your mind as a memory
And then you will start working
Towards It So Do That Right Now and Then
Let's move ahead yes it's compulsory let's move ahead
Some people will say, I am doing it later
Make a little effort, do some physical movement
Let's Do It Pause the Video and Do It Now
Still do yes, rest of the science you told me.
Which is commonly known as Polydex Poly Urea?
What is common in polyphagia and is worth understanding?
We don't have to mug up, we don't have to remember.
Just see if your sugar is increasing
It's 200, 250, 300, you don't know.
Now the body cannot handle that increasing sugar.
Don't throw it out of the skin from the ears.
If he can, he starts urinating.
Extra sugar is now concentrated in urine
If you don't throw away sugar then you will urine a little more.
It comes out with sugar hence urination
OK increases and hence sweet urine too
This is why there is also sweet urine.
Because then they talk about it
You may come across letters etc. which are old.
In ancient times, Ayurveda was called Prameha.
In the text that if spiders come around them
If they are around urine then they have diabetes
It is possible that more urine may be thrown out now.
To Throw the Sugar
You will feel more thirsty, okay, that's why
Those access thirsty people say poly dips
This is called poly urea, it is called urine.
Poly Dips Means Thirst Poly Means Many
Urea Means Urination or Multiple
Urination with multiple thirst and
polyphagia phageia meaning feeling hungry meaning
There is a lot of sugar in the blood 300 400 sugar
But if you can't reach the muscles then
I also feel hungry and by the time all this happens,
feels
How much sugar is there in a person's blood?
But because it is not reaching the cell then
Cells are asking for more sugar, give me more
Give sugar and then we are eating more and that and more
rising and rising sugar and yet
Feeling week and still feeling week
and weight loss is also occurring, then this
There is a big cycle and something is happening in it
Do you have Chakra view? Yes, absolutely Chakra.
There is weight loss and I am becoming very thin.
are also happening because urination increases
Cells are not getting equal nutrition
I am feeling hungry and want to eat more.
and infections, we are all this
If so then you are probably heading towards diabetes.
Have black neck, waist circumference and all this too
I told you what is meant by four dimensions.
looking like
is looking totally totally wat
Looks totally awesome but all this
It's happening there are only 50 people but there are 50 of us.
But you are not limited to people only.
Have to do waist circumference and medical test
So these became some visible symptoms and some
What your medical reports will tell you
Done and sleep all these things if you a little
If you keep this in mind then you will always
Will be able to prevent it if not done now
This is very good, take a U-turn from here.
Of course we have more on diabetes
and which stop working or which
There are effects like kidney and liver.
Is it or have we recently received one?
Did a podcast with the specialist
In that we talked about diabetic retinopathy
I discussed it, so please say something about it.
would like
Everyone has to remember this number 140 140
140 140 140 ok why remember the number
is because as many d
your blood sugar above 140
That many hours will remain free inside your body
Radicals means a special oxygen
There is something special which is made and then it goes away.
It rocks, it rocks as you say
Were means what does that like
There are small veins in the legs sooner rather than later
Take tiny veins that are thinner than a hair
They have nerves and they are going to get blood pressure.
How many more blood vessels can you imagine?
We will start damaging them
If you do then it is called Neuropathy
feeling a little hot or sore
Are the legs or it looks like cotton over
we're going we're it all starts
Diabetes may last three to four years
But it usually starts after seven to eight years.
Neuropathy occurs due to nerve damage and
Just like the damage is happening there
Retinopathy and Nephropathy meaning in retina
Damage and kidney damage are these three
microvascular means small blood
Vining gets delayed and if the legs
If there is any problem then it will spread
It starts and why doesn't it heal?
finds has to be cut yes ha
Gangrene occurs and amputation of foot occurs.
They are then towards macrovascular
Is Neuropathy Micro Vascular?
meaning small blood vania then macro meaning
Problems with large blood vessels
Will there be gangrene in the legs?
Even Heart has to undergo amputation
Attack or stroke means paralysis of heart.
having an attack, all these macrovascular means big
Problems with blood vessels start
And in fact we see patients are not
very maybe when that stage comes then
They start crying, hey, pick me up here.
Now I don't want to live by your type.
Is there any such patient in my experience?
Examples that reach such verse stage
went and after that then you yes many many many many many
Because we currently have 10 research papers
One of them, Research Paper 306, is published.
kidney patient
Those who had kidney reversal were okay
It is published OK, so many kidney patients whose
Creatinine had increased by two or three or four times.
has decreased
And it became normal around one and a half to two and a half hours.
And if I want to see the visible then I want to see it now
Gulbarga is missing a patient from Gulbarga.
There was almost a half inch wound on his leg.
It happened and for about a month he
They are being bandaged, they are being bandaged, that's fine.
It was not working then they started the system
Did it and then that wound healed in one and a half month
He was filled and then he came back to life.
Because even a small bite is what it is.
If we are feeling pain somewhere, it is felt throughout the body.
If it shakes the body, it means there is a headache.
It's not just the headache, the whole body is at work.
Don't do massage so anything pain anyway.
Anyway Badre doesn't keep it completely in good condition so
These are such blessings that we receive many, many times.
have met a lot
Diabetes is not silent just like that
He is called a killer actually silently.
How much does T kill in the body right now?
We don't even know we don't even release
So take a U turn so figure out who
Just remember 140 just for 24 hours
At least 21 hours out my sugar is at 140
I should stay inside and I am fasting.
If you have to stay inside then it's like this now
We are saying that it should remain, but how?
We will test whether the glucometer should remain
For that, they also come these days.
CGM patches come here or they
What is the most convenient method of patches?
Installing patches is convenient and reliable.
Those patches are reasonably reliable but
Many times they show a little less sugar, okay then?
We highly recommend
Have to check who is on insulin yes yes
And he is having problem with pricking
So use that patch and parallel cross check.
Keep doing this so that 1015 points have to be added there.
So if you can then there is convenience in that and no one else.
Apart from this the method is without patch i mean
I know what I am asking is very
Glucometer is the best so do it with that.
Every home should have a glucometer yes
Every home should have a glucometer.
There should be a BB machine every now and then
Due to Covid, there is lack of oxygen in every house
The meter has also arrived and is available in every house.
There should be a measuring tape that should be used
A weighing scale is also a weighing scale is also a
This must be absolutely certain.
If you keep three or four things in your house
So you mean do a self monitoring
can and make a routine i mean
I would suggest everyone to have a family ritual
Doctor, please decide how much should be done.
Sugar every Sunday or once in 15 days
no no no all these things at once
check your weight check your weight
Look how the weight is.
If we want to reduce it then we tell them.
Check daily, we tell you the region because
sometimes good things happen when you start doing them
If so, weight goes down every day.
It almost happens and it also provides motivation.
There is motivation but we are humans only a little
Cheating happens a little bit here and there
So immediate data shows stress
What comes from data is the best
Stress is that eu stress is the positive
Stress Positive Stress Immediate Hey Now
Should I be a little more strict today?
Those who want to lose weight then you can lose weight every day
Have to do it everyday have to do it but mean
Like I personally, every day is my ritual.
As soon as I wake up in the morning and freshen up, I
I check my weight and it looks very bad for me.
helps me stay motivated
Some people get stressed because of that.
Hey, I have gained weight, I am not stressed.
I feel positive stress if
I feel like I did something wrong when I shut up.
I did something wrong. Get back on.
Track from this perspective and this mindset
look at him with this belief buttocks
I was talking to the doctor about this.
I was doing it from the point of view that I wanted
In every house in Hoon How About India?
People are also listening to us and their athletes
Every house has its own medical day.
Let us take an hour today and
Family members have to gather and we
These are our four-five things that we have to see.
Athlete Bare Minimum What We Can Do Ours
Also at home once every six months
It is right to get your full body checkup done.
With this much we will cure many diseases.
Only prevention can be done like waist circumference
Right should be done every month and that until
Food is not coming till half time.
You won't get as much as you want, you should be diabetic.
Don't be serious then be strict with yourself
yes yes yes yes of course because he's big
Take freedom, ladies or gentlemen?
Neither husband nor wife has diabetes.
Then they said he has diabetes and he is not sweet.
I want to eat, I don't have any waist problem.
Looking at the girth, the waist circumference is too much.
What's yours? Share this video.
with my family members who say so
Share it now, this is enough for others.
Will see the plate, remove it, I am not diabetic.
I will take it, I will take it, that's right
If not then check your waist circumference every month.
BP is fine as long as it is not normal.
Will check once a month if non
If you are diabetic then sorry BP.
If you are one then you should also consume sugar daily.
Ideally, Avery is not coming back to normal.
Should be done ok so it depends on
problem you can decide the frequency
Are the butts the same like you said in a month
We met again and we all had a little fun.
Checked it out for fun, it's a very good one
Bonding effect measurement of the body part
Those who concentrate on muscle building
A little bit every three months even if you major
How much of a mango surrounded upper thigh?
How much is the lower thigh? How much is the upper thigh?
Is it big? Do we call it the biggest?
Achievement we or biggest investment if
You can do it inside your body
Measurement wise that is your calf meaning
Calf Hum If your Calf is good muscular Hum
We are ok and you are majoring we are fatty
Even if it remains, your calf butt may become bigger.
which can be properly excised and muscular
can save you from many diseases
So do coffee measure every month, every three months.
Is true an ignore muscle exactly because
It's Not a Big Muscle It's a Small Muscle Group
So people, I would see him doing exercise also.
I go to the gym a lot, people.
We don't just do exercise and we should do it
Calf exercises are very important.
thighs waist arms chest breathing in
Breathing out once in three months
You can do major but doctor you tell me this
Maybe you were saying maybe I told you
cut in the middle why would you say that
Were the calf muscles strong?
So many diseases can be avoided
Because no era deep nosed calf
muscles do not grow
If you are in good overall health and
He will grow only if he is evolved in fitness.
If you have grown up enough then it is definitely yours.
walking running cycling
And that's a second heart It's a second heart
There Literally It's Called Second Heart
medically good calf muscle second to calf muscle
It is called heart because there is a lot of
All Venus engorgement means the blood of the vagina.
There is a lot of supply and it gets stored there.
OK OK and to mobilize it
How and I have you done calf exercises?
Think normal if you take a brisk walk
jog running cycling
Your calves will also get stronger gradually.
start growing like this
Can do exercises and
Exercises are the easiest especially for
All the Women If you are standing in your kitchen
When you cook food, you hold the slab only.
You can raise coffee as simple as it is
That's also my video, please watch it.
soleus pump says i started to
You also keep doing it, listeners also keep doing it.
No Actually I'm Very Proud of My Calf
Too much exercise in calf muscles
I do it and I feel that my body
The strongest part is my calf correct the
The moment you start falling in love with your
Calves and Start Defining Them Well
Start Feeling Proud of Your Overall Body
Because calves are a very important
aesthetic aesthetic aesthetic also and
Medically also very relevant part of your
Body When You're in Leggings and Tights
If you wear it, you will get your calf muscle.
Feels proper and you feel very yes
Like you take pride in that so much
Strong If That Means I'm Very Fit
Even the spectators would get a little jealous
And they also take inspiration like you.
That too of health influence, what are you?
go somewhere, did you go to a meeting?
People who went to meet you, you wore something nice
If you are wearing it then you have seen Gunjan ji's crow.
How wonderful it is, inspire me too
I am taking inspiration from people
They say what you are, not your clothes.
So it's okay, you can buy good ones.
Ho But the Real Clothes That You're Wearing Is
Your Body Itself How is your body you know
What ma'am actually I am behind this now
I tell you the reality, I have a lot of muscles
It is strong, I have a little role in it and
A little roll I think maybe my
Genetically too strong to be honest
Now I don't know, this happened many years ago.
Think this incident may have been seven to eight years ago
Must have gone and then because I have awareness
I didn't realize that my muscles were strong.
I used to think my calves were bulky, okay and
I used to feel very insecure for
Example: I didn't wear skirts.
I didn't wear shorts thinking that my
My calves are very bulky and my legs look thick.
Yes, it doesn't look good, and once again mine
I had a shoot in Mumbai for Influence.
I had started my body butt was fit.
I was insecure about the calf while it was fit
I had a shoot in Mumbai Shilpa
A fitness song with Shetty Hum Kuch Kar
They were ending as soon as I entered the room.
Kiya and Shilpa and when we met
Shilpa looked straight at my calves and said
I envy your calf you have really great calf
Muscles and the one that changed my perception that day
180 degrees I thought I was insecure
Regarding this, since that day
So I said wow I mean so much
I started feeling proud and
Started Wearing What Ever I Wanted
Has my perception changed whether it is good or not?
So thanks to that day I knew I knew it
It's a Nice Thing to Float Also
It is okay, okay Doctor A, let's move ahead.
And now we come to something very important
Now let us come to diet and this.
Can say diabetes reversal diet tips
Can also be called or diabetes prevention
Can also be called diet tips because nowadays
People are very conscious like me
Told our viewers that diet specifically
Conscious are health conscious but at the
Same Time They Still Want to Enjoy Everything
In moderation they want to sacrifice
Don't Omit That Nana Do Anything
Let's help them if they eat in moderation
Understand what kind of flour and what kind
Oil, what kind of biscuit, what kind of chocolate?
they can eat easily how much can they eat
When can they eat all these things?
If we help a little then the most common
We start with food items and
The biggest thing we say about diabetes
The Culprits that follow
Start with sugar and because today's date
There are many alternatives to sugar in
We are famous alternatives to Sweet Nurse.
Will also talk but before that like jaggery
Khan Stevia Coconut Sugar Palm Sugar Yeh
Sugar is the first thing, sugar is fine.
Yes because it is pure glucose high
These calories directly affect your blood sugar.
It directly increases its GI high.
It happens at 60 but this
There are alternatives now people feel like sugar
Not eating sugar, but actually eating it.
Ultimately, that too is glucose.
But its as an expert as a doctor and as
What about you, a diabetes expert doctor?
say let them here from
There are two things of sugar, there is one.
glycemic
Index second is epigenetic change ok
Due to which sugar cravings come again and again or
Glycemic index you can go to the internet
If you enter chat GPT then you will get it instantly
If you still got the point correct then it
Least dangerous of all in terms of coverage
What will remain in it is from the lake for example
Stevia ok ok different forms of it
There is also an after taste in it.
too many to neutralize
There are options, you can see them if you want.
Want sweet in some form if you are high
Are you diabetic? Are you conscious that you don't have sugar?
If you want food then this option is definitely available to you.
There is also munk fruit, sugar and many coconuts.
Sugar is palm sugar and they are in terms of
Better option than regular sugar or jaggery
Correct so you experiment with it
what you like and your sugar
How much are you in the diabetic range?
Non diabetic range is in diabetic range
You play with it accordingly.
ok ok because according to me it is main
Sugar is not sugar, it is overall sugar which
It's Happening in the Day Paha Ima Idli Dosa
roti rice which is one roti also five spoons
There is sugar, one cup of rice and five spoons of sugar.
So how much sugar do you eat overall in a day?
Paying attention even beyond that hey
I ate a piece of chocolate.
I didn't take anything very sweet, it was half a teaspoon of sugar.
so sugar
Quantity What is happening Age Sugar Rat and
As Carbohydrates Coming From Das
Grains and Fruits Because Pulses Are Also
Carbs at 60 at Grace Are Around 780
You know it is made from cubes and fruits.
Beside Water That's One Part of It
So if people can understand this well then I can tell them
Let me explain a little here
Like the doctor just told me that
Carbohydrates are also sugar and sugar is
Sugar is the difference between these two sugars.
which is defined by their glycemic index
It is processed table sugar which is
Its glycemic is direct glucose.
The index is very high meaning in your body
As soon as it goes, it directly enters the blood stream.
which are carbohydrates such as
Rice, bread, grains, pulses, all these cereals.
What is this special complex, why is it?
Break down occurs in the body and
slowly slowly convert into sugar
If these happen then your body will gradually
Sugar gradually increases in installments
blood sugar increases immediately
How ever does eating sweets not cause spike?
There is a sharp spike absolutely perfect perfect
And the men who see danger are refined
Sugar means sugar, jaggery, your table.
All sugar is refined sugar and coconut is it.
Sugar Palm Sugar Sugar Mango Fruit This is also one
What does refined mean in which the fiber is removed?
Given, it becomes refined as soon as the fiber is given.
Remove that sugar, it will be absorbed quickly.
Like if you date, what about we date?
They say liquid gets date syrup date
You get syrup and you get dates, you get dates
You will eat dates directly
If you eat, sugar will increase slowly.
will grow because there is fiber inside it
Fiber will cause slow release but you will date
If you take syrup, your sugar will increase immediately.
Is fruit juice correct? Insulin increases immediately.
Spiked slowly with fiber in it
Yes, there are a lot of diabetics in your blood.
Make mistakes like in fruits
Glycemic index of watermelon
Yes, it is the highest and many in the summer season.
Diabetic feels like it's water, it's water
There is water and we eat a lot of watermelons.
Or what is in watermelon juice?
You see how juice is made with a mixer.
It is rotated and then taken in a sieve.
goes and then kept its fiber fiber
goes, keeps it and then comes down
If it grows quickly then the orange juice which we get
I think this is also good, isn't it?
So reduce sugar and orange juice also your sugar.
If you are going to increase then anything refined for
A diabetic and for a pre diabetic and
The one whose waist circumference is already expanding
Insulin is going to spike we mean sugar
As the body grows, insulin will spike so that
That sugar does not stay in the blood for long and
If excess insulin is our enemy then it
We need refined sugar in whatever format.
If you keep it minimal then it will be fine.
Be it main sugar or any form of sugar
Even if it is fruit juice
is going to increase your insulin
It doesn't mean that we should stop
It seems as if you have done some heavy activity.
We are shopping in the mall, we have walked a long way
Either you came running or you came walking.
only if you drink fruit juice
Well it's very right time for you
For you because only then will you get sugar rush.
We need that thing, it's a matter of time.
Ok when we balance these things
Have to incorporate my issue comes sweet
What is meant by craving is a very interesting thing.
There are many viewers for examples to understand.
Those who will not be able to eat at the end
a little rice
Want two spoons, why don't we have it?
Without that there is peace, solution and satisfaction.
She doesn't come u mean carbs want or
You specifically need a lot of rice.
People want rice after eating rice.
Need need need rice for example
I take someone for lunch
I need a little bit of sweet, I need something sweet, yes
Right that's also late sweet
Cravings can be in form of grain
Cravings and F from the Format of Ally
Many people have a craving for bread.
Means that carbohydrate craving
You are having that sugar craving.
This is correct correct correct that in that
is also quite a complicated mechanism
Because as soon as you eat some sugar it
Then that insulin just hits your system.
As insulin increases it self
Creates changes in the brain in neuro
Transmits dopamine serotonin GABA here
its effect is much greater
Soporific effect due to increase in insulin means
There is also a sleep-inducing effect, so a lot
All people who are late government servants
Are you a teacher or work in an office?
What do they do now with what they have to take?
Those two chapattis and some vegetables will remain in the office.
We will remain correct and usually in the office.
Don't take it away, even salad is not available.
And in India, what have we said about salad?
They say it means his entire status has been destroyed.
Ignored completely ignored means two or three.
Cucumber pieces, a couple of tomato pieces
meaning our salad
Like salads can be enjoyed and you
No, there is so much rich in it, we will learn all that now.
Stay slowly, ok so what happens like
I ate those two rotis and had some vegetables.
If you eat together then that insulin spike
Will do ok and as soon as insulin spike
Will cause sleep, soporific effect
Means if you have food at 1:30 then give it.
A little car system slow around 2:30
In all the organizations, in all the colleges.
At 2:30, everyone's system is on standby.
Mode remains and then he wants tea and coffee.
need something
stimulating
It's the design of the box that's wrong.
Our lunch boxes are
Also the lunch box at home which is in your office
take to college take to school
You will see that there is a big one in it.
What is the portion and we rice in it.
Keep vegetables and bread, keep small ones
I keep vegetables in portions.
I changed it a few years ago
Vegetables in the larger section of the lunch box
Rice is kept in the smaller section.
so do this switch it helps a lot
You will do it and it should also be like this
There will be balance, after this salad etc.
There's Extra But I'm Just Saying Switch
Your meat section is in the roti section.
Have vegetables, bread and rice in the vegetable section.
That's right, do this just because.
Overall carb load is high in this country
Raat and we have a tip for this which is 25
Formula with Rule of the Fourth Morsel
What it means is that we give two tips together.
People what does it mean that the plate is in front
Is it supposed to be a dinner plate or is it good for all of you?
If you can eat things together then roti is dal.
Or sambar, cooked vegetables and salad
Is
All four components are important.
What is the low plate on all four components 25
Meaning of a loaf of bread in simple language
If you have taken one bowl of dal or sambar then we will eat that much.
Take the same vegetables, one bowl and the same amount of salad, ok
And if you want to take second bread then first
Think and feel, can I and a bowl of lentils and
One bowl of vegetables and one bowl of salad
Will I be able to eat it completely? If yes, then another one.
Roti is allowed, if not then half
Take roti, then half a bowl of dal, half a bowl
Half a bowl of vegetable salad, many people
Those who eat two or three rotis and at the end
We also eat some rice which is 50 to
60
Carbohydrate crane in Indian plate
The biggest car comes in the format of
causing insulin to spike
Central Obesity Fatty Liver and all this
To increase that grain component you can 25
But now bring the people with diabetes.
If you feel too hungry then give up
There is also a lot of overeating and cravings.
So what can they do to prevent this?
Overeating or kissing their meal plate
It should be such that it is a balanced diet.
India is a dry country which can eat bread.
Converts to spoon means bread
We break his his his live
A spoon is made and we dip it into the pulses.
with sambar with that roti with it
If we eat properly then our bread means five.
Six, seven, eight spoons, this is absolutely okay.
How well do we analyze and
What good meaning they do every day.
We do it every day and we do that.
What if we eat too much spoon?
Have to use the spoon like a spoon
Have to learn to do it first take the spoon or
To take a fork or whatever and first
Eating salad is the first bite, salad is right.
First training of salad to test birds
Two Second Bites Cooked Vegetable As It Is
If without bread no one will die
Have you directly tried potato curry or whatever?
You are taking vegetable from okra, gram is one vegetable.
Enjoy the bowl of vegetables only, not one
I am saying spoon spoon one spoon
Eat salad, eat one spoon vegetable, eat one spoon pulse
eat the bread without breaking it and spooning it
Look at the three things that happened like this.
Let the taste buds touch your tongue
i guarantee your sweet
Cravings will reduce because when the fourth
Till you get a bite of bread, yours will be
Test birds trained have become three different
For taste and that in the end of rice
Do you have a craving or a craving for something sweet?
Sweet cravings will reduce if your
Every day in life we ​​are wrong and it is you who is wrong.
You can't say, I have a sweet tooth.
Everyone in our house has a sweet tooth
I will punch you. Will you say this with great pride?
Realize we all have a sweet tooth
Well, there is no problem for all of us sweet.
It feels good because that's what it means
It's a fun thing, it feels good as soon as you eat it.
But eating more sweet food and grains every day
If I am in double grain then in the beginning
Say two grains at a time, don't take it at a time.
take one grain take one grain ok and then a little
Reduce sweet cravings and then notice
We will do it after a few days and then we will go somewhere else.
Eat sweets immediately for 72 hours
Epigenetic changes bring back those cravings
And let there be something sweet and let there be something sweet
go sugar cycle called once you eat
Pleasure Trap: You eat it once and you eat it again.
Craving to eat again occurs for the third time
It happens and then you ride that cycle again.
If you don't get what you just told me then
The solution given earlier is very amazing.
Eat salad, then eat vegetables, then you can eat one of your
And eat pulses, eat vegetables, eat pulses and then
Eat Bread After and the Grain is Actually Sweet
This happens even if you eat whole wheat bread.
Take a little and you will feel sweetness.
It is in the mouth when digestion begins.
Goes The Moment We Start Chewing It That
Releases sweet juice absolutely and a
bar you get out of this sugar cycle
So you will get all these things, that sweet one is yours.
Whatever factor it is, it definitely makes it tick.
You don't have to take it separately, no need
And another diet tip like you
It is very important, that is FS formula.
What is that smoothie or sprouts
Salads Soak Nuts
Seeds, okay, even for a month or two.
early morning
What and how to make smoothie? Freedom From
of diabetes
Perfect smoothie made perfect
It should be tasty, take vegetable smoothie also
Can also take vegetable butt
See in the end balance of all the tastes is
Very important we are sweet sour salty
Spicy and astringent taste when
The system remains at peace only when there is balance.
I would prefer to go to any one side.
If not ok then smoothie sprouts
If you can, have a little for breakfast.
If you want salads then have them in both the meals.
put some in rat breakfast too
Salads Soaked Nuts Almonds Walnuts If You Want
Are you able to digest even two or four tasks?
Let us soak it and remove the water.
Don't want to take skin don't want to take because
They are all acidic and seeds seeds us all
Age Indians eat very little seeds.
are inside the seeds are inside the seeds
Minerals and minerals make your body
Alkaline and alkalinizing the body is very
Like and process is important right now.
too much is happening too much is happening
Because our continuous day is morning tea
Biscuit then Pava Upma Idli Dosa Dhokla that
All quick sugar increasing meals and then lunch.
Sugar is increasing quickly both at dinner and time.
so our sugar is getting [ __ ]
Continuously we are having glucose shoot
If glucose shoots up, what is your pH?
Blood starts going down and becomes acidic
gets applied and neutralizes that pH
Then we rope to
magnesium phosphorus calcium ion
out of bones hence our bones
If you are getting weak then you are suffering from osteoporosis.
Even after all the osteoporosis
Patients who come say we are drinking milk
Even if we are eating calcium,
why does osteoporosis occur because
There is too much acid in your body, inflammation
if it is too much then the body
Learn how to do alkaline for that
Do the 5s formula and reduce a little grain and
Grain Vegetable Dal Salad Equal and Sequence
Do it right if you start with so many tips.
Will give to follow only welfare
Kalyan is going to be very nice beautiful
And this absolutely means that right now you
You can implement this with
Video ends next ag next mill
Is my sequence tooth grain at only 25?
The fourth bite will remain the grain, the first bite.
It won't last, it means it's very, very good
This is how it should be and I personally
If you follow, I will completely endorse.
can
That first you eat the salad, those two cucumbers in the salad
If the pieces remain lying on the side, it
Don't say salad, first a plate and quarter.
Your dinner plate is your personal plate, isn't it?
If the plate is personal then your salad plate
Why isn't it personal? It's true, it happens.
Our dinner plates on the dining table
There is a salad in the middle and there is a
Poor personal in a small plate
Take the salad plate, finish it then switch
To your main dinner, main portion in that too first.
Doctor, eat vegetables as you suggested.
The first bite should be of vegetable, why should it be?
It was a wonderful thing, very useful.
Well, we started with sugar, now we
We also talked about grace, if grace
Let's dive a little deeper into the past few
Millets are back in trend for years
Earlier people used to eat only whole wheat chapati
Now all the ragi, jowar, millet all and then
Quinoa is also like this type of grains, now everyone
You have become common as soon as you are in everyone's house.
These include if anyone is diabetic or
If someone is pre diabetic then how to reverse it
First to best according to you for
Which grain will be the lowest glycemic?
The index that will remain is millets ok but
There is a catch and that is ragi or nachni ok
Ragi nachni who eat more down south
Diabetes increases in those who eat a lot
OK Neuropathy Nephropathy increasing
We still have patients pending an audit.
He is a manager and an audit specialist.
His own doctor had said that you and your
Dad should eat more ragi.
Father has kidney problem and he has Neuropathy.
Which gives them relief after leaving Ragi
How did the butt grow with ragi because
Ragi is high Glycemic index is high
Glamic Index Yes To Foxtail Millet
Projo Millet Bania Millet Brown Top
Millet Kodo Millet This is better for you
Is barley with him we are right jo chana roti
It is being eaten in India for many years
And Barley Was Found in Mohan Juda Auro
Harappan civilizations also sleep here
Barley is a very important grain that we forget
If it has gone then it is necessary to revive it.
Glycemic index immediate means best
If I say then millets accept ragi ok
Then better than around that will be
quinoa ok after that will come khapli wheat khatka
Veet Jod Gau Lal Gau Bansi Ga Kalyan Sona Or
Khorasan Wheat There are many types of Wheat
The old ones are still there as you speak
Lokvan or Sihore or Sharbati wheat dose are not
Good They Have Higher Gluten and Higher GI
ok then come rice there is a lot of rice
matta samba pony red black brown use
Variety includes wild rice etc.
Is of course white rice we have to avoid
So we see brown rice and good wheat
The level is the same but sometimes
South Indians by genetic predisposition
Do Better on Rice North Indians Do Better on
We see that naturally and it comes after that.
is millet ok yes sometimes millet koi koi
Which suits me better than Vette?
is a major millet but sorghum which is sorghum is
Higher glycemic index than wheat brown
Rice and millet, jowar, sugar whenever possible
If it can increase then you can mix 1/4 urad in it.
Have to do ok so 34 jowar 1/4 urad mix
If you take it that way then it is better for
You and Versus Offcourse White Rights and
Wheat Breads
That's all the brown breads too.
There are caramelized white breads inside.
There is so much alkan inside one bread that
If you inject a rat, it will
Diabetes can happen so we have to be careful
Careful of it so starts with millets
Barley and Millet Typical and Quinoa Dos
Major Millet Pseudo Grains Sum of Them Wheat and
Rice Good Varieties Than Jowar Ok And Then The
Others ts the hyra ki of grain rki so
One thing is very clear from this that all
Healthy Things Are Not Healthy for Everyone
Correct so you see that if you like
Thyroid can also be caused by eating too many millets.
Issues may increase so you have to be
Careful little bit i see one more thing
And that is to do everything yourself in India.
There is a little bit of tendency, which is this?
Good because we are also a little evolved people
As a country, call it consciousness, call it education.
There is an old culture here but
Somewhere we don't need help with the
Experts absolutely believe it is a medical
Expert Beat It A Dat Expert Beat N
Exercise Exercise Watch Olympics Now
You can also see what the scenario means.
Smallest countries adjacent to lithu ania
is also higher, we are at 71 so sometimes we feel bad
It seems that oh man, such a big country, so many people
Saare Itna Yoga Capital of the World Itna
Talented people still can't get medals
Because the exercise has not been understood and
Put all the blame on resources
Don't recognize your inner resources
That's right, I don't understand the exercise.
A little we feel in general because a little
Got messed up there p matter so i need
Experts at Time Say Yes Podcasts Are Useful
Experiments Are Useful But When You Have
Obesity is also a medical condition
Hypertension cholesterol is a medical condition
Fatty liver is very common and so is diabetes.
Medical Conditions You Should Take Help With
Take Proper Help and Then Learn It Become
Independent But Spend Some Time Learning
About it exactly
And I mean for my health, this is someone
It's not even an outside thing, we spend our weekends
Don't think while spending oh my
God, we are not about material things, I can even say this
No more that we should think there but
This is your like what our bodies say
R temple so for this temple so it's n
Investment it's an asset for you so
It's your care as much as you take care of it.
The right thing is to be kept, so the experts
Go closer, definitely go, it will help you.
will do and I say one more thing that your
Will shorten recovery time
Absolutely
So you will be if you are conscious if you
You won't reach there by doing youtube-dl.
Sometimes it backfires, sometimes it backs up, yes
Sometimes the reverse can also happen.
People saw it and started it and are continuing to do so.
It's been a couple of years and sometimes it's kidney failure.
Problems Uric Acid, all these can also increase
Yes it can backfire and if let's
If you look very good then you are very perfect
Once you reach a place, it's a journey.
That has to be covered in one year or two years.
Short tone becomes if you are an expert
If you hold someone's hand, then definitely do it.
There should be no stinginess in this
Because like we talked about grace
Oh yes, in such detail.
So we never thought that such a thing could happen.
How much time will it take to read this much?
Why spend more time thinking and understanding
Time is Money Save it Invest it at the Right
Place Kar Kar And This Is For You Someone Else
Don't spend on your neighbor, spend on yourself
So it's very important so we have grace
One ingredient to cover
oils so and this reminds me that a
There was some brand behind it, I don't know its name.
Whose tag line will I take?
was diabetes friendly
There were many cases related to oil and then
After that he changed that tie line
Also did because they missed the off course from him
Leading advertisement is that but when we
Talk about oils and the way in India
You know this sunflower oil and all that
Oils are most commonly used when
Which again we discuss oil in the same way
Let's do best to worst or worst to worst
Best Oils for Some Diabetes and Pre
Diabetic and Who Wants to Just Avoid
The question of oils has many
Dimension number one is traditional oils
OK Versus Newer Oils OK or Number Two
Is Technically Superior Oils Us Versus
Easily Available and Affordable Oils
Correct, all this has to be kept in mind
Plus Test Plus Test Preferences That
You know from our lets in the family
Customs wise we have been doing right and wrong
I understand more about oil issue
Don't complicate, okay in general
Everyone knows from the lates that less oil has to be taken.
Don't take too much, teaspoon or two.
tsp sub maximum depending on
Your weight and your goals and that point
Number one point number two is you need to stick
With Filtered Oils Cold Pressed Oils
Refined oils because
Apart from refinance, the chemicals inside it
Changes are made so that they move towards water
It feels like water without going
The Smell and All That Itself Is Very
Damaging for the system you refined
You should not take filtered oils at all.
You have to take cold pressed oils.
Take whatever suits you now.
If you look for something extra,
version olive oils typically come towards the
Top part Then there are some oils which
Taste wise not great or affordable
It is not like avocado oil, it is walnut oil.
Oil Flaxseed Oil But That Will Not Be Possible
So your simple South Indian coconut oil
do you like no problem north india no
Are you using mustard? Go Ahead Peanut
Peanut in West India or Overall India
If you are using oil then you can use it.
You can use the local oils just keep the
what you say
Quantity in mind and unrefined nature
In Mind and That Should Do the Job OK So Too
Things unrefined and quantity yes and
Don't try to do zero oil because
Some people become very enthusiastic
We are here and we say zero oil cooking.
Will do and will not use any oil
Fat will remain for a few days and will become a problem later
You will come because you have to go into so many situations.
You will not be able to do it and this tropical
Country is India is a unique country here
It is hot here and moisture flies.
Here we find some oil which
If you don't feel like living in a cold country
Infact Super Traditional Oil Like a Sesame
Oil Sesame oil also in some preparation
It is very good in any season
And in some conditions, sesame oil for
Example for those who have joint pain
It Works Wonderfully For Absolutely So
Vata Pitta Kapha is also present in it if
It gets a little hot if you take mustard oil.
So the season also has to be kept in mind and this
Keeping everything in mind, you can get so much intelligence at home.
He is at home in India now that he knows
What to do, Broadly, just follow this.
Don't go after refined refined oils.
Read more and what do you have to say about ghee?
Especially for from the point of view of
cholesterol
And blood pressure, ghee and ayurveda, yes.
I was also a student of Yoga and Ayurveda
I am three years full time, sorry three years part time
time i did diplomas saturday sunday
Before that I was an MBBS student and
A lot of experiments with my body and
That's why witchcraft has been done on the bodies of others too.
Which is why you are talking holistic
me at all while talking to you
It doesn't feel like that medical shield.
It's all medical medical there's a perfect
Balance of Lifestyle Diet
Mental Well Being and Medical Health
Perfect Communication Neuro Linguistic
a lot on programming and psychology
All the work has been done so anyway ghee is a
Very controversial
Subject S Sach Der R Enf Videos V R
Hey ghee is very good, just eat it.
Should say this, this, this, that and I
I would like very much
Cholesterol from clear ghee
Period will increase if you are saying my time.
Ghee is A2 ghee, it is of cow, not of buffalo.
Do this or that, cholesterol from ghee.
Will increase if cholesterol is already high
Already have fatty liver, already overweight
If you have diabetes then go zero on ghee for some time
Then if you want its lauric acid
It needs anti-inflammatory properties which
Also his property is positive, he wants that.
We will see later, first clean the system.
No, you can understand it as it is now.
We talked about ragi in grains, it is
A Very Healthy Grain But Very Nutritious
He is not fit especially in case of diabetes.
Because the glycemic index is high
Ghee has many similar properties.
With all good faith Ghee is very nutritious
It is healthy and has many medicinal properties.
How about ghee if you have cholesterol?
If it is high then it is not the right fit for you
So In Your Case You Need to Go for Lighter
We also added versions of oil and ghee to the dish.
Made a reminder back some time
Are you saying that no diet is eternal
Is not universal is not the same throughout life
Beans are not applicable to everyone, eat them occasionally
I took something, something has arrived, there is some laddu, there is something
Okay, that regret too and then again
Means balanced balance sheet and its
Connected to a health goal that's right for you
You absolutely keep working accordingly.
Next J Milk
Product Other Controversial Drinking Milk
should or
No, here milk is a milk product.
LS means we are talking about all milk products.
You can start from milk
For people with diabetes and related disorders
It's a very simple English song for me
His
[music]
For
Education means the amount of research that has come out now
And the amount of research that has been published and
As much as we have experienced 200 Hajj
people with diabetes b bp cholesterol
Such pills are off milk is one of the
Biggest Kalp
Hypocrisy I Second That Biggest Culprits
Will not allow Sulin to function properly
Many compounds causing inflammation inside
which increases inflammation in your body
Will give so will say Tata bye bye to milk
Immediate for athlete some time to three
Months Okay and That Includes All Milk
Products for some time and then gradually
If you want to include you can
Correct age at the right time is the need for the body
Because milk causes a lot of growth
Already your belly is growing, already fatty
Liver is already there, sugar growth is everywhere.
Growth is growth, you have to ungrow.
You have to cleanse, you have to detoxify
It has to happen, so Milk also has to be banned for some time.
Blow me again guys I want to clear
I would like that if the doctors say that
If milk is not ok then say it in one condition.
It is not milk but overall milk.
There may be many benefits for some people
Milk is enough for some lifestyle
It may be good but if yours currently
If your lifestyle is sedentary
If you have style then you already have this lifestyle.
If you have diseases related to diabetes then maybe for you
High fat milk which we call full cream milk
They say it's your body, not his.
If you can support then for some time first
Get fit and then you can adjust your diet to your
We can change it accordingly
If we talk about special cards
Because its properties are quite different
Other milk products especially milk
Since, curd also comes in this category.
Protein will also be inside it, IGF will also be there in it.
If the diabetic is inside then whatever
Will not allow insulin to work properly
For that we have to take a pause for a while.
Milk Chi Yogurt be it buttermilk or any other
In a proper way
Paneer Ha Prawn High Protein High Acid High
Inflammation High AGF It Will Interfere
With insulin action listening to this
Doctor Can Can We Say Diabetes Diabetic
Vegan diet is a good option for people
Mediterranean diet can be a good solution
Is Vegan Diet in the Beginning Very Very?
Good to Kick Start Diabetes Reversal OK
This is our very solid experience
Is So You Can Actually Like Completely
Some time of blind trust on this fact
Follow Vegan for Follow V Gani Jam
Try it and you will see good feeling American
Diabetic Association European Association for
Study of Diabetes International Diabetes
Federation is in conferences everywhere
Our papers are presented by researchers
It is published, we are ok, we are speaking from experience.
There is no such book, don't read it, right?
Right Right Perfect Perfect A Next Food
We come to the item Fruits to Fruits
Have discussed a little like you
Specially told about Watermelon
Variety and some seasonal very sweet fruits
How ever are we, on one hand we also say that
Fruits should be enjoyed but
Here again moderation portion is important
Control's Butt Talking About Fruits Like
Mango Grapes Lychees That Are Extra Sweet
If there is diabetes then what is pre-diabetic?
This is a no no for people, eat a little too much
Can you eat how much or what?
Precautions can be taken while eating such as
Do not eat on an empty stomach after taking some fiber.
If you eat, then experiment a lot on fruits also.
After doing this you know it very clearly
Realiks are an important part of ours
Diet or It Should Be There Hum It Should Be There
It contains certain enzymes, vitamins and
The fruits which come in seasonality
Properties are given highly
Beneficial for the system ok now diabetic
If sugar increases then we have to be
Careful around that is different on this too
There are videos to watch, you can watch them for a long time
Meaning long videos are low GI medium GI
High GI will fall in these three categories
Watermelon is typically even all the sweetest in GI.
Pineapple and Jack Fruit Ripe Jack Fruit
This will come and avoid it in the initial period.
Get it done typically ok but mango bananas
leeches gray
Chickpeas ok this papayas this medium GI
They will come very soon and we will have a bonfire.
Because of the satisfaction we get from it
that amazing
Do you know if summer season comes and you don't eat mango?
What a summer season it's been I think near
Impossible for Maximum Indians to Live
Without a Mango and for Due Benefits
Apple and berries will also help in lower GI.
And the cherries come very loose, somewhat local
Berries and cherries are also available in many areas.
They are highly beneficial they should try that
out dragon fruit is also very good loji
Lo comes in I and Kiwi comes in GI.
An extent also comes there so you can
Experian Cherries Berries Apple Pairs
Guavas Ok Ok Dragon Fruits Kiwis Inn
Lower Tea So Fruits You Will Include
Ok, we will do one or two accordingly in the beginning.
month we prefer in smoothie only
OK the fruit and then slowly
Add independently not with a meal
Many controversial things also come up that
Have it with the meal yes it's actually very
This includes that one should eat before eating.
You should not eat after eating then eat
Should be eaten on an empty stomach, not on an empty stomach.
Food should be there so it is also again a there are
Multiple Thoughts Around This or So People
Typically eat apple after dinner or
Eat fruits along with their meal
Invariably we increase triglycerides and uric
Acid increase is seen after eating.
eat yes yes eat with food or
Why do we eat after eating? Because
it converts into triglycerides
Okay along with the food whenever you take it
So You Should Never Be That Combines With the Food
And Turns Into One of Every Food
Has an enzymatic property of digestion
The body's response is to respect it.
Should Fruits Are Best Taken
Independently and what is what is the
Best time to eat fruits if sugar
If you are in control then first thing in the morning after waking up
You can also take this thing, it doesn't happen
That directly after fasting when sugar
If it gets into the blood, that can cause a problem.
Is there any misconception about eating on an empty stomach in the morning?
Because near the fruit and also inside the fruit
So if there is fiber then quantity will also matter.
If you eat whole fruits, eat whole fruits.
So if your quantity is 100 grams
You are keeping around you eat a cardamom banana
Or eat some mango also.
It's there, it's fine, it's fine
Don't Be Scared of It's the First Thing in the
Morning is great for a fruit 11 o'clock
Is great for a fruit 5 o clock is also
Decent for a fruit but if any fruit is
Creating Bloating for You If Gas Forms
It is happening and many people feel it clearly.
If it happens then you have to understand that you need that suit
Either he is not timing or he
The quantity or type of food suits you.
If not then you have to change it, ok then
You yourself analyze, eat fruits and your body
Will Tell You Body will give you hints that it
Are you feeling okay bloated bloated
How are you feeling? Okay, yes, that's it.
I think the work should be done by myself because
Every body is different so there is no one size
fit all correct right next is non veg
Nonveg Foods Specially for Diabetic People
And what if there is pre-diabetes too?
It is found in non-veg food
no carbohydrates, very little or
Protein and fat maximum is negligible.
Fat and protein typically 50% or what
Never Depend on the Food Items That You Take
So as soon as you eat something non-veg like chicken or
If you eat anything else then sugar does not increase.
Yes, then I think, after eating this, it's mine.
If sugar is not increasing then this is for me
ok yes we don't think of it
that non-veg fat
It will only add fat to their body.
Number one and second nonvegetarian food
It's acidic, it's highly acidic, it's OK, there's something in it
Acidic food is on the highest level
Will cause inflammation and nonvegetarian
Food has a higher inflammatory response in
Blood involving eggs even if temporarily
Your sugar is coming under control for that
Mile OK for future perspective while already
There is more protein and fat in the body
It is too much and the acid is also too much, you have some
Even if non-veg is stopped for a while,
you will benefit
if it is
What is the dish absolutely non-veg and again the same?
There is fact support whether in private or in a
Satvik diet which is there for some time
It's okay not to stop the podcast
This is happening for their benefit
The entire discussion can be about a few things.
Doesn't sound good but ultimate
the benefit is yours
Last but not the least maybe you can also listen to this
I won't like it especially those people
those who consume alcohol
I don't know the rest you will tell them ok
to get it installed or
Otherwise it is okay to consume alcohol in diabetes
Is it safe or not and if it can be taken
So how much and which type, details on this also
The video is butt in short because a video
We're putting it all in so as much as we can
If you can make people aware then
Whoever comes to drink alcohol always
Ask what about alcohol?
What do I say first if off
Stop if you can, ok for some time
atlist is acidic because right is acidic
Second, that liquid fat is because of us.
Gram it is san calories hum hum to jo
Consume alcohol regularly every day and even every week
Will we take it or will the quantity be more?
Gradually you will see that their fat is increasing
We and their acid are also increasing in the body.
That look on their face, in their hair
They start looking old quickly
Right So Alcohol Is Acidic and Basic
Liquid fat when in front of a glass of alcohol
Yes, it's Reese because fat is nine.
Calories per Gram Carbohydrates
Calories Alcohol E Consume Calories So When You
You see a glass of fat as if you are eating poha.
Five spoons of sugar, this is liquid fat, this is
Drink as much as you want wisely then you
Think and do so best stop it for some
Time to Detoxify the Body If Not
Stopping as much as we can
increase it to 50 if even that is not happening
So I say ok brother sister who
Also continue my green smoothie in the morning.
Drink it first and then we'll see what to do.
sleep about it
because main
The Thing We're All Addiction
Driven Our Food is Driven by Addiction Food
Addiction is worse than any other addiction
Like for that matter smoking
Also take tea addiction tea addiction
Tea addiction is prevalent across the country and seven
Half past one needs more at three or four o'clock and the same
Regular tea has created a stir in the country
where tea was drunk and no one was there
China or Japan did not mix milk
This is the gift of the British to us.
milk tea swirled on elephants
Made him drink nectar like nectar in his mouth
Where I live, there are shops
Now it is written outside that it is like nectar.
Tremendous branding will be like its nectar.
Like nectar and in the morning the whole house
roams and roams in the afternoon and that one
Nasha Hai It's Addictive It's Like It's
Cocaine hits her like a heroine
It's not easy to get out of the smell
If you can't live without something
If you are craving it
If you are then you have an addiction to it, even if
Be it liquor, be it tea, be it
you are sugar you are its slave
Of course it's good if that means those people
For those for whom it is possible to leave late
or those who are not socially casual
If you feel like drinking then that
Which type of alcohol can be taken and
How much can I take? I usually avoid it.
I am because then it is better to take the job.
It's okay if you want to take it then at least lol
Take it, keep it at 30 mA, keep it at 60 mA if hard.
Ok, definitely beer etc.
Avoid those that are white spirits
Transparent spirits are better
Then the hard marginal improvements end
Differences Are There In That Comfort For Him
Watch that video from, just try two-three
Are you able to spare a month or two?
That'll be good for you right
Absolutely absolutely one of my teachers said
She was given such a sentence and then she was released.
Said one peg of liquor is Rs 5000
Neurons get permanently damaged
lot 5000 now a lot of them will say
Trillions of neurons are dying by 5000
What's going to happen if you wait a bit?
No, that is also there and let's see another one.
Philosophy is a different philosophy Mexican philosophy
There is a book Tales of Power by Kallus
If anyone wants to read Canada, then read it immediately.
It's interesting, there is a different system, it said that
There are two quality things of human being, we are one.
Hai tonal one ha nagal nagal don't go in
Because it's a little more difficult
Tonal is very easy to understand
To understand what tonal quality means
Quality that makes you feel like reality is yes
to interpret as it is
Capacity means this table is like this, this glass is like this
This mic is like this, this is gross, we are now
Gunjan Aisi
is in its decoding
For example, people are like this, the world is like this
Life is this, this is the quality of yours.
The reality inside is as it is
Understand that it is called tonal quality without
Without any layers or any perception
Now correct without any judgments
The quality which is free from any addiction or addiction
decreases after jens
[music]
Immediate means the one who has drunk alcohol for
If the example is a little more crazy then
The surrounding environment begins to look different
Some things start to separate, some in my mind
My thoughts start reaching somewhere
And we are a little out of touch with reality.
It seems and that too when I read it.
Do I feel that I am in good health?
wants my tone at its peak, not me
and you can see all the athletes who are
High Performance People are CEO's
athletes
His discipline in these things is very high
We think he is very rich
He must be drinking a lot, isn't it?
have left he has left PK
Yes, experiment and learn, everyone does that.
is only
You move on and you learn right now and I
Think with age we understand this thing
should do that as we grow older
Anyway, we have to limit some things
should be done together when you are childhood
When you are young your body is everything
tolerates it easily, you eat sweets
eat fried food because your physical
The workout is done according to
Your body ages as you age.
These are your organs and they wear out.
Your stress changes as your lifestyle changes.
If we grow a little, then along with this
You should also make your dietary changes step by step.
I should keep doing this step
Have observed a lot in Amitabh Bachchan
The more I read his life,
There was a time when I used to do
Everything You Use to Drink, Smoke, Eat What
Ever Life Style Stay Up Late Nights Butt
Slowly and gradually they have been
Changing his lifestyle and diet
Habits that are reasonable even at this age
He is such a successful actor, he is a legend.
And the rest of the actors with him
He was still more successful than them
That's because they made those changes
Quit drinking after one point off
Time Only Quit Sugar After One Point Off
time what is why he is what he is
Today is amazing so this is how we should live our life
Little by little you do it one by one
That yes, I will limit it in the next two years.
I will do it if anyone needs alcohol
If it is a habit then the athlete should follow the vision that
I have to manage it slowly and reduce it
And I have to be mindful about this.
let's think
Don't let him rule you. What's right
Hai I mean an example of Amitabh Bachchan ji
Done and if the audience is watching
I am listening and will see in his life also
Like he can drink as much as he can in 20.
Were able to dance late nights
If you were able to have fun then body next day
Was able to handle back and they could be
Functional means being able to go to education college.
I was also able to go to work, same thing.
It's changed in 30, don't do it so late at night.
Couldn't drink the quantity I was getting
Were and like 40 comes after 40 and feels
It happens that now the body reacts completely.
I have to limit my late nights.
My drinks and all my you know fun
I am also eating and drinking, so my body
It gives feedback on its own, you just have to listen a little.
Maybe I have observed this a little too
When people like that in their 30's and 40's
Midlife crises occur when they probably
A lot of things just to stay relevant
They do it because they want to party
So just want to have a night out
Tell them that they are still young they are
Not Outdated and They're Still Enjoying
Their Life That Validation Is A Self Validation
Learning is a social validation lesson.
In the process of doing many such things
go on doing go on doing that
Maybe now they have that happiness from within too
not giving and as you said that their
The body probably can't even tolerate it.
She is not even demanding but still giving
Keep on doing it just to fight with them
Midlife Crisis and Trite Be True
Stay Relevant Very True in Fact One of the
Munch Said Something Very Nice Once That You Were The
Average of the Five People You're Most With
i.e. in Hindi which is of five persons
You are spending most time with them
Average you are right now their average is you
Take intelligence, take lifestyle, habits
Take it, understand that if you are their average then
You have to bring change in your life.
If you want to bring changes in your health then your
There is a circle of five people around you whose
Are you drinking with me or going to work or
the healthy or unhealthy things you are doing
If its average then you are correct and human.
Being by Himself and Herself is at a
Certain level powerless, we are at one level
We are powerless, meaning we become powerless.
Because our group remains like that around us
is and we become its average gravity
of five people so if something has to be done
Who among them is changeable and who has to fly?
Think about whom to take and do it accordingly.
What about you? They call it group group.
Change environment, change group like we did
We started clubs in every city.
If we start FFD club then healthy people who
have done a year long program
Those who are passing GD 100 Km.
70 7 year old people are cycling yes
108 Namaskar Running 10 Kilometers
Where are their families when you meet them?
Do you meet or sometimes have dinner at his place?
Do you go there or do you eat them at your place?
Those people you wish to call
When you meet someone who is healthy, you feel healthy.
If you are healthy and want to be healthy then yourself
That also becomes an addition to health too.
Addiction happens as you said.
That you have to learn about calves at a level like this
Tha butt Shilpa Shetty said change ho
If you go then you will become addicted to it.
Healthy Calf and You Start Becoming Hats
And you are a health influencer because you are
Addicted to health then choose yours
Addiction is going to be a wonderful addiction.
So choose which addiction you want.
It's a simple thing, do you need sugar addiction?
You need to be addicted to workout and it works for you
You will get the same calling you get addicted to.
And you can't sleep without it there are
People including myself
It's no good if you don't exercise
Looks like there are people who don't get sweets
You don't like it, so choose your addiction.
Because in both that dopamine and serotonin
Getting sucked is ultimately it's dopamine.
At the End of the Day You Need Dos Happy
Hormones so choose the source from where they come
Want happy hormones just like ours
Podcast on Diabetes
tha but all these related things b all these
Actually this is the circle of life
Yes, and that is the keystone habit.
There is one that I read in some book only.
I said that if you fix one of your habits
If you take it then it would be a domino effect.
It's like all your other habits are connected.
It happens if you just do this in the morning
I have to get up on time, you will get up on time
Time for yourself for automatic
You will get some reading and exercise.
People will pray, people will make affirmations
Manifestation will fulfill your future
How wonderful the day will be if you come to office on time.
arrive on time, arrive at work
Efficiency will remain and you will be able to leave office on time.
You will be able to come out on time and be yourself again.
If you get time you can go for an evening walk.
Yes, you will have time to call mom.
Your social media to call friends
After life becomes better, you can have dinner time.
If you pay then you will have early eating time.
Your sleep cycle has been monitored while you sleep.
If you wake up on time again the next day, then One Keystone
Habit of Just Waking Up in Time
Fix All Your Life Problems Correct So I
Think We Join the 5M Club and If 5M
Is Too Much Rabin Sharma Atlist Go For 6 M
Atlist Go For 6m Right Being A
diabetes specialist
Doctor, how is your diet? What do you do?
eat in a day mine
My diet is typically the same as what I tell people.
Let me tell you, I also take the same pill.
I feed people so I love
What is Being a Vegan Largely Okay?
Just like there are different faces in everyone's life.
You are doing something like this again
Phases keep changing due to season etc.
etc but in general the waking up is late
Around six ok ok sa kabhi time tha 5
There used to be an O Clock but it is no longer there.
Is because of certain changes that are
Happening Then You Get Up I Love To Have A
Little fruit in the morning ok and a smooth
Depends ok ok and then a little workout
etc. and then in the workout
Changes Remain It's Not the Same Workout
Every day and then when we talk about workout
So we will do it okay, after that I love to have
A Nice Breakfast I Think If The
Breakfast is comprehensive and proper
Then your sugar craving grain craving
The automatic becomes less later then we
In that I prefer a dal based breakfast
ok ok there is lot of variety in it like cheela dosa
Dhokla Appe Ragda All of That Ever
Sprouts live never live
Pulse based so that protein is also there and
Protein Minerals Fiber Slightly Satisfying Feeling
comes little and often i protein
Also take powdered plant based protein powder
I take it ok after the dal base breakfast.
ok ok ok then I continue and then
Lunch is lunch is the formula on 25
I am happy that I will take less grain and then
Around 5 O'Clock I Love to Have Changes Na
Something changes there some days it
Will Be Fruit Some Day It Will Be Nuts And
Seed Some Days Sometimes Bigo Manuke
soak in the morning and then in the evening
If you eat those raisins correctly then
This also reduces sweet cravings significantly.
So all that and dinner is a little lighter than that
What ever I had in during the day
Bhi Grain Dal Component Vegetable Salad Evening
Vegetables are not available very often.
The salad gets mixed by speaking definitely.
Proper in the afternoon ok o around 8
O clock and 7:30 is my dinner time and then
You go off to bed between 10 to 11
Depending on commitments how many but 11
I usually avoid waking after 10 o'clock because
Felt the acid really rise after 11 o'clock
It's my usual day but there are faces sometimes
Some are int al and some remain mud al.
ok you don't take t coffee at all i don't
Take Tea Coffee At All I Take White Tea Some
Times Again Not Every Day White Tea Is Very
Interesting green tea leaves
It happens to be white tea and but again
I Don't Take It Every Day I'll Take It Some
You never took the time, that's why you got used to it.
No tea or did you take it intentionally?
Have left, have tea, have coffee
Because green teas or herbal teas black teas
You don't take any of these in the office
Girnar Kava I Prefer The Most Okay
Because in between if I least like to
There is a lot of work to do in talking, so the throat is sore.
Always have two or three Girnar teas a day.
Kava waali or hubal tea, something or the other is always on.
Yes, she becomes ok ok wonderful so this
The diet was a diabetes specialist doctor
What does this mean? Have you ever asked a doctor?
what is your diet now you know that
So It Can't Be Any Better Cool Last
segment which is very very
Our home is important when our nose is in our hands
me or our parents who if any
The old generation is older than our parents.
When people who are older have diabetes
It happens because as age increases
Chances of diabetes are also very high
go to them or their children or their
How can partners do everything?
kind of physical activity because that
If people are older then very much
gym or excessive cardio exercises
If he can't even do that then how can he support himself?
can keep physically fit so that he
Diabetes and is that the first thing at this age?
I can reverse diabetes
First question and then if they can give some
Tips for them and some tips for there
How can they support their children?
Diabetes usually occurs in late life
After Lates to 60 Typically 55 60 65
he has a special name yes mard m a r
D mild age related
Diabetes ok and that with one hand pill
Usually under control and this
The easiest diabetes to reverse
Okay, good and also type two in India.
Classification is Hum I Road See Road Too
Is anyone technically strong?
If OBG is heavy weight then it contains insulin
What is called resistant obese diabetes?
Road ok then someone's combined insulin
of resistance and insulin secretion
The problem is they are more difficult to
It's much more than the handle but the edge
Easier to Handle Point Number One OK Point
Number two as soon as 60 and 70 are crossed
Then it is more difficult to regain strength
Stamina also increases and becomes a little tougher
Becomes less flexible
Yes but that is important but these three
Balance becomes more important than
Coordination we right that someone while walking
Due to which it does not last on slippery surfaces
He should not have any injury or hip fracture.
Go because that's the biggest reason of
Problems in Elderly People Corrected
Definitely Senior Citizens We Are Related Yoga
We can practice that too
There are separate videos for OK balancing exercises.
Keep your legs close for half a minute
eyes closed balance one foot forward one foot
keep back eyes open half a minute half a minute
stand on one leg with eyes closed and other leg on
Many such balancing exercises for 10 seconds
which are very useful to them
Okay for age so a little physiotherapy
Based a little yoga based is important but
They should not neglect
Strength because major problem in India
OK Yoga Capital is all about strength
Despite living in diabetes capital
This is why there are fewer medals in the Olympics
Because we learned strength training
If not properly then simple things for them
It is like a bucket of water
Is water from mug, water from this bucket, water from that bucket
Put in s simple s that become a
Little Mild Strength Activities for Them
S Simple Agat or Resistance Bands
or crazy ball for coordination
Let them play with light crazy ball this r
Very Useful Activities But I Do Want To
Give Them Bigger Goals Because We Have 70 Years
Plus People Who Do 100's Cycling OK 100
K Cycling 100 K Cycling We Have People
Who've done it, we've got 60 plus people, we've got
Gun for Big Tracks Including Dhanu Kannu
Track 13000 ft even to Everest Base Camp
Now we are getting ready, so age is a number.
Yes it's a chronological number ok but
Biologically you can be very young at 65
And you spent the first 51 years of 75 us but that age.
We will depend on what you have done
And whatever stage you are in, from there and
How can I increase my strength a little and
How can I increase my stamina and my
How flexible can grow by taking that vision
If you do it by staying in touch with experts,
That progression will be like personal trainers
I Think We Still Underutilize Them In
India ok i love doing yoga my very much
All yoga videos are hit by 19 million people
Have Seen But I Still Have a Yoga
Trainer Coming to Me and Training Me Because
You will earn money from the trainer who gets you to do it.
Yes, you will do the physical alone at only 20.
The same in activity as in your personal
The trainer is the one who will push you.
If you can't push to that level
You have to keep it, even if for a while.
keep for a short time, not for life
These things are very very important for
them because what is the problem i
I usually tell most of them after a
Certain Age Gravitating as an Exercise
We and Walking Is the Kind of Time Passed
Working We Do Is Definitely Time Pass
Of course because she's the one even if you
Do brisk walking also, it will be of some benefit.
Its but walking in anti gravity
there is no element it is with gravity or
It's Largely Aerobic and for Growth Some
Degree of Growth Relevant to Your Age
A little anti as per your age
Have to do gravity and some aerobics.
That's why walking is in the beginning.
We spend 20 minutes in the first two months
You don't have to do it for 45 minutes, why do you say that?
You don't have to do it, try it and then you will understand.
Then some blood circulation exercise
Let's do Surya Namaskar while sitting.
World's Best Warm Up Ho Little Plank
A Little Wall Pushup A Little Squat Depending
On person to person then some yoga
Practices increase
And then whatever they like because I
I saw people getting lumpy even during exercise.
Some like gym, some like running.
Some like cycling, some like yoga.
It's like the Olympics just happened
a basketball player a basketball
Looks like a player, volleyball looks different
The gymnast looks different in the 100m
Printer Looks Different Marathon Looks Different
Archery guy looks different L'The Body Text
The Form of What You Do
Repeatedly Makes Sense So You
I did a little walking, yes mine
It's not true that the exercise is over.
Take at least one thing and go a little deeper.
Virat Kohli is also a good opening batsman
But He Does Everything Her Body Type Is Different
Opening bowler has a different body type.
Do Different Exercises to Do the Best Of
What they need to do is very important
That you don't enjoy exercise
Should You Have to Develop the Joy of
Exercising and Going Deep Into
exercise because as long as you
Every exercise is a big ocean
As long as you don't enter inside her.
The car is not going to move forward because
By eating less you will lose weight in 6 to 2 months
Wait a year, that weight plus 5 kg is coming.
Because we are at the same level as the fasting person.
Your metabolism will be useful later
You have to increase it and you will get your body reshaped.
Gotta be ree sculptin' and athletic
Even senior has to find identity
Citizens If They Decide OK I Want To Be A
Yogi Mor Ya Ya Der R Inf D 108 Surya
Namaskara One Some Month and They Are Much More Fitter
Then people of their own age are very unhappy
The thing is that before 90 80, major in India
The problem was starvation, starvation, people starvation
Used to die of obesity and now obesity has become the new
Mostly people live their ideals in Pandem India.
I am 10 kg overweight and I am not
Talking About Obese People Who Are Obese Right
Now normal people who are listening to us if
Whatever your weight is minus 10 kg.
You would think that yes, I am so athletic.
This is the condition of mostly people.
And what about the muscles? Need muscles at 32?
26 is required in males and 26 in females and
In our clinic, muscle and fat
Scanning is also done at many places.
Just got the Galaxy Watch, it works even in the gym.
hai hai hardly
Everyone's muscle is weak, its region is in India.
Protein intake is very low, no protein
If you take it then how will you build muscles?
Protein is not stimulation, body is
synthesizes to a certain degree
Because whether it is fat or carbohydrate
is basically carbon hydrogen oxygen
Extra nitrogen in protein
Molecules are late enough vegan vegetarians
And others also who can synthesize their own
Protein in the body but you produce it only on demand
You are not doing it, take a simple example
Am
The same grass the cow will eat will make her fat and the same grass will
The horse will eat and become strong because
Metabolic needs of both are different, they can
Process the Same Food Differently a Soldier Will
Eat the Ice Cream and Convert More of That
Ice Cream into a Muscle and Obese Person Will Eat
An Ice Cream and Convert More of That
Ice cream into fat is the basic of your body
The demand is to listen to the podcast every minute.
Even after hearing this, you can either use carbohydrates
Are you or are you using fat?
Metabolic Demand Over a Period of
How has time been made is very very
It is important what food you eat
How will you handle it if you are really well?
Defined and well fitted to a certain degree
You can handle a lot of things to a great extent
Diet wise you get ultra only sometimes
Also joins marathon who is diabetic
What happens when people do a lot of exercise?
They think I have so much access
I will eat anything and it will make a difference.
Doesn't matter but it's not like you have to
Balance Your Diet You Have to Balance the
Exercises You Have to Balance the Mind
Because in the end the mind plays the biggest
Will Games Absolute follow suit or not?
Will do and the biggest training is mental
Training is okay and done right
It takes time because that inertia that
Lethargy that postponement or dealing that
I will do it a little later and also start a little later.
Did it but didn't get the result then got stuck again
I can't do all those things
work according to full proof
Only then all work will be done so 360 degree work
Have to do it and do it while enjoying
This is most important so we covered it
Completed diet physical
Mental health also talked about activity
Also talked about inner environment and outer environment
I think we've covered it all
L Means This Could Be a Diabetes Bible
This is a podcast that will give people something else after this.
No need to go anywhere else to listen
There is no need to just come to the execution.
Should have come yes and yet this is just the beginning
will remain because that sea is very big
Any common myths about diabetes reversal that you may know?
Listen and mean quickly let's debunk these
myths so that people if someone right now
This is the biggest misconception left.
Can diabetes be reversed?
It happens and many have experienced freedom from
I am the founder of Diabetes Ka Joha and 16000
At present there are free people and many people have
Glucose tolerance test GDT also passed
And it's not only me but Dr. Roy Taylor
Doctor Neal Bernard Doctor Joel Furman Many
People were the first to publish research
I am happy, can diabetes be reversed?
It is confirmed and now thanks to many
Initiative is understood that happens
The second idea is that
Diabetic people make less insulin
That's why sugar is being produced which is very big
What we said in the beginning is fasting
If insulin is high then many people
actually making more insulin and
Too much insulin is causing their harm.
And the main problem is insulin resistance.
We need to work on it.
Learning is important and the third friend remains that
he is diabetic not me
I am all of you in the same boat together in the morning
Whatever you eat in your family, you eat the same thing.
Stress is someone who grows up with a similar lifestyle.
Whose number is first? Who else will come later?
Diabetes pre diabetes and non diabetes
Hypertension with and without cholesterol
hypo thyroid pcod black neck it
Let everyone understand that insulin resistance
syndrome or metabolic syndrome
Don't separate them, this is the only one
These are not for diabetics.
These problems are increasing inside the body
If you are connected to him in the family then L.R.
Remember the interconnected insulin deficiency
The problem is not insulin resistance but more
Insulin is a big problem and has to be done
I need someone else to get it done by hitting you with a stick.
the one too
If you want then consider it a positive stick.
it's for your good
Like in childhood, perhaps the teachers were good at that time.
Didn't seem to like it or got angry at the parents
Maybe you get angry at doctors?
Or are you getting angry at me like this?
See this is for your own benefit and we are
Your Well Wishers We wish that this
Your benefit from this conversation from the podcast
You may get benefits and you may get some takeaways and
You can make some changes like this from now on
In your life so that your life can be better
datchi and so many lenses that you gave us a
Full frame consulting has been given very much
This is valuable and I am very thankful
I am a great doodle for your time.
You're so much for all the wisdom that you have
Shared with me and with our viewers today
Yes so thanks for inviting and all the best
Let's all enjoy lasting freedom
Because that is possible Yes India now
Happiness capital is not diabetic capital.
The World Should Be Let's Make It Happen
And so it is so yes so I hope
Like every time, this time too I do it for you.
You will find the podcast very useful if you
For yourself or someone special
If you want to take a customized diet plan then
You can take advantage of IMA programs
Can be found whose link is in the description
Is available and guys like this we are different
Expert doctors of fields on this channel
Will keep updating so if till now you have subscribed to the channel
If you haven't subscribed, please do so.
Which doctor and which field will you see next time?
We would like to hear the name of the doctor.
Let me know in the comments, see you next time
Stay Fit Stay Hit Podcast
