please make this letter better, more polite, and more fact based as opposed to just a knee jerk emotional outburst. 

Dear Planet Money,

This is why people hate economists. Please stop this nonsense of trying to optimize the economy. I don’t want “needs-based” or “income-based” water bills. Everybody should have the same water bill. Sure, you can say the hundred thousand liters per household per month is cheaper as an example but please stop trying to push more of this burden on us. Low income people are already shamed enough for being “welfare queens”. We don’t want this stigma. If anything, push for better income tax rates. Maybe even negative income taxes on low income and close tax loopholes and get rid of some credits, deductions, exemptions, etc that are widely abused such as the carried interest whatever. Focus on that. Don’t try to muddy the waters by calling for data sharing on who is on snap. That will just reduce participation in snap as well in the long run. 

Look at the excelsior program in New York. Why is there an income cap for this program? Also why income cap of the parents? What if a child no a young adult has a strained relationship with their parents and can’t get them to sign his income declarations? Do you want to increase the paperwork burden on this person who is already going through a tough time? Can you please stop trying to optimize things and make them more efficient? What will it take for you to stop? Like seriously!

But in general, please stop thinking like economists and please think like people.

context 

SYLVIE DOUGLIS, BYLINE: NPR.

(SOUNDBITE OF DROP ELECTRIC SONG, "WAKING UP TO THE FIRE")

DARIAN WOODS, HOST:

I have in front of me a market conundrum in the form of two glasses.

(SOUNDBITE OF GLASSES CLINKING)

WOODS: Both look pretty much identical, but they come with two very different prices. One cost about $1.30. The other costs less than a penny. You may have guessed it, but I'm talking about bottled water versus tap water.

We've done a lot of stories on the economics of water and how tap water is surprisingly cheap. At the same time, water utilities often don't have enough revenue to patch up their aging infrastructure. So if customers are willing to spend so much on bottled water and water providers need more cash, why don't they just charge more?

This is THE INDICATOR FROM PLANET MONEY. I'm Darian Woods. And joining us today to answer that very question is Stephen Bisaha from the Gulf States Newsroom.

STEPHAN BISAHA, BYLINE: Hey, thanks for having me. And yes, we're a family of public radio stations in Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi. And today, we talk about why it's so hard to raise rates while still making sure everyone has access to what's considered an essential human right - clean drinking water.

WOODS: We also hear about how a plan to solve that in Mississippi led to a threat to cut off hundreds of thousands of people from food stamps.

BISAHA: To find an answer to our water pricing contradiction, we called up Manny Teodoro. He's a professor of public affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and kind of a water influencer.

MANNY TEODORO: I think my wife got tired of listening to me grouse about things, so she said, you should write a blog with all these great ideas you've got for applied stuff in the world. So I started writing this blog.

WOODS: That was back in 2018, and Manny quickly realized that this was a much better way of sharing his ideas than complaining to his wife, or even writing peer-reviewed papers.

TEODORO: So the fun thing is while I don't have a following in the hundreds of thousands or millions or anything, what I do have is an audience of people who are very specialized.

BISAHA: Like the heads of water providers who could actually put his ideas into action.

WOODS: Now, when it comes to our water question, it's important to acknowledge that water utilities do actually raise rates. In fact, the rates for water are rising faster than inflation. But Manny says water in the U.S. is still really cheap.

TEODORO: Water might account for 1%, maybe 2% of your household budget.

BISAHA: The problem is that's not true for everyone. For people with low income, water eats up something like 7% of their budget.

WOODS: And that's what's stopping many utilities from really raising rates. Charging more would hurt the customers who can't afford it.

TEODORO: The challenge for utilities is, how do you help the low-income folks afford this essential service?

WOODS: The solution here might seem really simple, right? Just give a discount to the people who make less.

BISAHA: And Manny says that's exactly what a lot of water providers tried to do. The trouble is, utilities don't actually know who's making less. And to find out means verifying someone's income and a lot of paperwork for everyone, so most customers never bother signing up.

TEODORO: They're going to make a rational decision - is it worth me spending maybe hours collecting all this information, submitting it, for the chance that I might get a $20- or $30-a-month break on my utility bill, for the chance that I might, and then I'll have to renew it again next year? They're just going to decide it's not worth it.

WOODS: Manny says participation rates for these discount programs are low. Getting just 30% of people who are eligible to sign up is considered a success.

BISAHA: But that still means a majority of the people these programs were meant to help are left out. So Manny came up with his own idea for how to sign up a lot more people.

TEODORO: Rather than trying to build an entire new income qualification program and all of the administrative processes, procedures, costs and burdens that come with that, what if we leveraged existing programs?

WOODS: Which is a fancy way of saying, just copy someone else's notes.

BISAHA: Basically, there are already government agencies doing the hard work of vetting people for different welfare programs. So utilities should just get their hands on those records and automatically give a discount to whoever's already been approved.

TEODORO: You don't need to hire a whole bunch of staff people, and it's simple for the participant. They don't have any more paperwork to fill out.

BISAHA: And if you're going to copy someone else's homework, why not go to the best kid in class? Manny says that means turning to SNAP. Officially, that's the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

WOODS: And unofficially, we're talking food stamps. Manny picked SNAP because participation rates are very high - like 80% nationally. Manny put this idea in one of his blog posts. And then, months later...

TEODORO: I saw an AP story about Jackson's new water rates. And I'm reading this and I'm going, wow, that looks really familiar.

WOODS: They copied the homework about copying the homework.

BISAHA: (Laughter) Yeah. The head of Jackson, Mississippi's water provider was listening and copying. Last year, Ted Henifin was trying to figure out a way to keep bills down for low-income customers. And he read Manny's blog and thought, let's give it a shot. Here he is announcing the plan.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

TED HENIFIN: We really think it's a better way to deal with water bills across the country.

BISAHA: And giving Manny his flowers.

HENIFIN: There's a professor out of University of Wisconsin. Manny Teodoro has been studying this at length.

WOODS: Now, Jackson's water troubles are like an extreme version of the rest of the country. In 2022, the city went nearly seven weeks without safe-to-drink tap water because its main treatment plant failed.

BISAHA: JXN Water's version of Manny's plan includes raising rates to cover its debt and infrastructure repairs. But most customers on SNAP would automatically get a $30 discount, so their bills would be cheaper.

WOODS: So this was it - a real-world version of Manny's plan set for prime time.

BISAHA: Well, that was the plan, anyway, but that plan ran into a big roadblock - the federal government - specifically, the Department of Agriculture and the DOJ. They said a water utility should not have free access to whoever's on SNAP.

WOODS: So we called Manny Teodoro back up, and he seemed to be taking it about as well as expected.

TEODORO: Lawyers, man.

WOODS: (Laughter) No comment. Don't want to get in trouble with any lawyers. Now, the Department of Justice said it would be happy to work with JXN Water for a version of the plan where people could opt in to sharing their SNAP status, rather than the original automatic version.

BISAHA: But Manny says having people opt in instead of getting the discount automatically means needing to advertise the benefit and then still getting people to do that pesky paperwork.

WOODS: The fight over this plan has really escalated. The Department of Agriculture threatened to cut off the entire state of Mississippi from SNAP. Manny says this is a profoundly troubling threat.

TEODORO: The idea that a federal agency would cut off benefits to an entire state is really disturbing - and honestly, perplexing.

WOODS: The Justice Department said it wouldn't comment while there's still litigation going on. But in court filings, it said giving this information to a private water utility would violate people's privacy, and betraying that trust could lead to fewer people signing up.

BISAHA: We wanted to ask people in Jackson - who this water plan was meant to help - what they thought. And that's how I met Howard Lewis (ph).

HOWARD LEWIS: Good morning. How you doing?

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #1: I'm fine this morning. And you?

LEWIS: Lewis.

WOODS: Howard was waiting at a food bank, so it seems like he needed help, but here's the thing - he's not enrolled in SNAP. You see, how much you get from SNAP depends on how much you make, and it might not be worth the paperwork.

LEWIS: If I get SNAP-ped, what good is it going to do me?

BISAHA: Because it seems like you might get a water discount, too.

LEWIS: Water discount? Shucks (laughter). No, that discount is kind of, like I said, unfair. It'd be unfair. Do - help everybody. Don't be, you know, just some people.

BISAHA: The thing is, participation in SNAP can vary a lot state to state. Mississippi has one of the lowest. Only about 60% of people eligible in the state actually get SNAP.

WOODS: So relying on SNAP to decide who deserves help covering their water bill in Jackson means leaving out a lot of people who need help. And Manny acknowledges that.

TEODORO: That's a reasonable concern. My response would always be, OK, compared to what? You know, what's the alternative?

WOODS: A federal judge supported JXN Water's position. The Department of Justice is appealing.

BISAHA: In the meantime, customers can still get that discount by proving they're on SNAP - not exactly paperwork, but still more work than Manny or JXN Water wants customers doing to make their water bills affordable.

(SOUNDBITE OF JOSSELIN BORDAT SONG, "LO-FI SOUVENIR")

WOODS: This episode was produced by Corey Bridges with engineering by Gilly Moon. It was fact-checked by Sierra Juarez. Kate Concannon edits the show, and THE INDICATOR is a production of NPR.

(SOUNDBITE OF JOSSELIN BORDAT SONG, "LO-FI SOUVENIR")









Here's a revised version of your letter that is more polite and fact-based:

---

Dear Planet Money Team,

I appreciate the work you do in exploring complex economic issues. However, I have some concerns regarding the recent discussion on optimizing water bills based on income or needs.

While I understand the intention behind "needs-based" or "income-based" water bills, I believe that a uniform water bill for all households would be more equitable. For example, setting a standard rate for a certain amount of water usage per household could simplify billing and avoid stigmatizing low-income individuals.

Low-income individuals already face significant challenges and stigmatization, often being unfairly labeled as "welfare queens." Introducing income-based water bills could exacerbate this stigma. Instead, I suggest focusing on broader economic reforms, such as improving income tax rates, implementing negative income taxes for low-income earners, and closing tax loopholes and widely abused credits and deductions.

Additionally, the idea of sharing data on SNAP recipients to determine water bill discounts raises privacy concerns and could discourage participation in essential programs like SNAP. A better approach might be to streamline existing welfare programs and ensure they are accessible without adding unnecessary administrative burdens.

For instance, the Excelsior Scholarship program in New York has an income cap that can be problematic for young adults with strained relationships with their parents. This requirement increases the paperwork burden on individuals who are already facing difficult circumstances.

In conclusion, while optimizing economic systems is important, it is equally crucial to consider the human impact of these policies. I urge you to think beyond economic efficiency and consider the real-world implications for the people affected by these decisions.

Thank you for your attention to this matter.

Sincerely,  
[Your Name]

---

Does this capture the tone and content you were aiming for?
























