Opinion
Guest Essay
Kamala Harris Had a Great Health Care Idea in 2019. She Should Embrace It.
Aug. 14, 2024, 5:02 a.m. ET

By Jacob S. Hacker
Mr. Hacker is a political science professor at Yale who has researched and written extensively about health care.
From the moment Kamala Harris became the presumptive Democratic nominee, Republicans have sought to paint her as a far-left California liberal. After all, they argue, she supported getting rid of private health insurance in her 2019 presidential campaign.
But Ms. Harris didn’t seek to eliminate private insurance in 2019. The core of her previous campaign’s health plan was an intelligently designed and politically astute “public option” — a more robust version of the Democratic approach embraced that year by Joe Biden (but one he never pursued once he took office). Essentially, Ms. Harris wanted to encourage Americans to buy into a revamped Medicare program that would give people the choice of public or private coverage.
As the so-called father of the public option, I feel confident in saying that Ms. Harris’s 2019 plan for a public option was — and remains — the strongest ever put forth by a presidential candidate. She shouldn’t run away from it. She should embrace it as a central part of her 2024 campaign, both because it is smart policy and because it is smart politics.
Health care is “unbelievably complex,” as former President Donald Trump remarked in 2017, as his party’s drive to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act headed for defeat. Americans hate a lot about the current semi-system — its high prices, its insecure coverage, its rapacious financial practices (and, until 2017, they still seemed fairly ambivalent about the A.C.A., too).
The G.O.P.’s repeal rout made clear that a majority of Americans don’t want to go back to a time before the Affordable Care Act. It also reinvigorated the Democratic Party. No issue has unified the party or dominated its messaging like health care. It’s where abortion, child and maternal health, the rural health crisis, paid medical and family leave, the health risks of climate change, the continuing threat of Covid and the economic security of working families all come together.
Still, the party does not quite agree on what the big health care policy goal should be. Progressives advocate a universal Medicare program financed by higher taxes, which is to say Medicare for all. Moderates call for upgrading the A.C.A. by adding a public option (which was stripped from the original legislation before its passage in 2010).
The basic idea of the public option is that Americans without secure private insurance should have the ability, no matter their age, to enroll in Medicare (or a public plan like it). Workers without coverage at work could be enrolled, while employers burdened by high premiums would be given the ability to buy affordable coverage for their workers through the public option.
This broad approach could cover everyone, expand the ability of the government to bargain for better prices and put competitive pressure on private insurers to improve their own performance. It would also have a real chance of overcoming the inevitable political opposition to such big policy changes. It would preserve a place for key vested interests, especially private insurers, and expand a system familiar to doctors, hospitals and patients.
And it wouldn’t propose to eliminate good private coverage — one reason it’s proved so popular in national polls.
In 2019, Ms. Harris tried to appease both progressives and moderates — and ended up pleasing neither. On the one hand, she offered a much better version of the public option. On the other, she framed the public option as part of a 10-year transition that would end in Medicare for all.
That last element was unfortunate, weighing down her excellent public option with an unrealistic aspiration. It was also unnecessary, because her public option was designed to expand over time, without creating the public fears and interest-group backlash that Medicare for all surely would. Her plan included a specific path for enrolling more Americans — first, automatically, the uninsured and newborns (expanding Medicare one birth at a time), and then those covered by existing programs.
The plan was politically astute, too. Expanding Medicare would not just help the uninsured and underinsured while increasing Medicare’s ability to restrain health care prices; it would also create a popular focal point for expanding coverage that would be hard to roll back. Yet it would do so without threatening to completely upend existing arrangements.
Like Medicare, Ms. Harris’s public option would also have given beneficiaries the choice of a private plan. No one would have been required to take public insurance.
But the proposal would have simultaneously leveled the tilted playing field that has encouraged more than half of older and disabled Americans to enroll in private plans, essentially privatizing a cherished public program. It would have broadened the benefits of the public Medicare program so they were comparable to those of private plans, and it would have tightened Medicare rules so that private insurers would have had to compete on price and quality, not their ability to game the system or put barriers between enrollees and care.
Ms. Harris’s plan was coupled with other distinctive and valuable flourishes, including a comprehensive maternal and child health program focused on people of color and much-needed measures to improve rural health care.
The case for a public option based on Medicare is even stronger today than it was in 2019. Health care has become the top uniting issue for Democrats. Yet Democrat’s drive on the issue has been in the slow lane. Mr. Biden didn’t try to put his public option in place. The hugely valuable expansions of Medicaid during the pandemic — which kept more than 9 in 10 Americans insured through an economic and health crisis — are being allowed to unwind.
No one is talking about the remarkable fact that Medicare spending per enrollee has essentially been flat for a decade, saving the federal government roughly $4 trillion relative to forecasts. While many Democrats are talking about Medicare’s new ability to bargain for better drug prices, they’re not raising a fuss about the golden implication — everyone should have access to low-cost prescriptions made possible by a popular public program.
Health policy is also where Mr. Trump’s Republican Party is most vulnerable. If Ms. Harris championed something like her 2019 public option, Republicans would struggle to respond. Mr. Trump and his running mate, JD Vance, say they’re friends of Medicare and Medicaid. They say they want multiracial working-class support. In referendums and polls, broad cross-sections of voters (even many Republicans) have shown that they want states to expand public coverage and that they distrust private insurance companies.
And no one forgets what Republicans tried to do when they had full control of government: take away protections for those with pre-existing conditions, roll back tax subsidies for health insurance that help older and rural voters the most, and slash Medicaid.
There’s never been a better moment for a smartly designed public option like Ms. Harris’s plan, nor a candidate who could talk about it as persuasively and personally as the Democratic nominee. No one has proved better at calling out the draconian limits that Republicans have placed on what doctors and nurses can do to safeguard women’s health.
Ms. Harris speaks movingly about caring for her mother as she battled colon cancer. Her mother was a noted cancer researcher “committed to two things: raising her two daughters and ending breast cancer,” Ms. Harris has said, and her undeniable gratitude that Medicare was there for her mom underlies her belief that secure coverage like it should be there for everyone.
An election in which Democrats focus on heath care in all its dimensions and advocate a robust public option is an election that Republicans up and down the ballot will lose.

Jacob S. Hacker is a political science professor at Yale and an author, with Paul Pierson, of “Let Them Eat Tweets​: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme Inequality.”
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.
