Opinion
letters
How Democrats Treat Trumpites
Readers discuss Nicholas Kristof’s column urging Democrats not to demean Trump supporters.
Sept. 14, 2024, 7:00 a.m. ET

To the Editor:
Re “Here’s Why Democrats Shouldn’t Demean Trump Voters,” by Nicholas Kristof (column, Sept. 1):
I take exception to Mr. Kristof patronizing Democrats and instructing them how to address Donald Trump’s supporters. Yes, there are those supporters who have suffered addiction and hardship, but that this might logically lead them to support a criminal and potential dictator who gives no reason for a rational person to believe he would serve their interests is simply a bridge too far.
Besides, many Trump supporters can’t even plead hardship as an excuse. They include the wealthy, the angry and the just plain ignorant.
Robert Millsap
Woodland, Calif.
To the Editor:
I appreciated Nicholas Kristof’s measured view in this column, though I know many people did not.
It is far easier to diminish Trump supporters, to view them as morally degraded and backward, than it is to focus on the very real issues that animate them. Like those on the political left, they are troubled by the state of our country, by the widening gulf between the haves and the have-nots, and by the growing sense that most of us are getting shafted for the benefit of a few. They see the American system as wildly off course and in desperate need of fixing.
These views are familiar to Democrats. Indeed, I suspect that there is quite a lot more common ground than we realize.
These are not fundamentally bad people. Most are not bigots. Most are not xenophobes. So why on earth do we call them these things? All it does is ensure that they remain in the arms of a man who has already shown his greatest concern is power — and holding onto it.
Brendan McNeal
Shawnee, Kan.
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with Nicholas Kristof’s argument that we shouldn’t demean Trump voters.
Donald Trump has referred to Mexicans as “rapists” and “drug dealers”; mocked a disabled journalist; referred to Haiti and African nations as “shithole countries”; told his supporters to “knock the crap” out of hecklers at a rally and that “I will pay for the legal fees”; and recently used the hallowed ground of Arlington National Cemetery as a political prop.
Surely Trump voters are aware of all this and more, yet the cult of Trump remains more devoted to him than ever. Furthermore it is impossible — and I’ve tried — to get Trump voters to change their minds, as they live in a world of alternative reality where the 2020 election was stolen, Mr. Trump’s indictments — and subsequent convictions — were orchestrated by the Biden administration, and human activities are not responsible for climate change.
Mr. Trump’s cultists are his political oxygen. He would be nothing without them. They are beneath contempt and deserve to be demeaned.
Richard Kavesh
Nyack, N.Y.
The writer is a former mayor of Nyack.
To the Editor:
Nicholas Kristof correctly notes that demeaning Trump supporters is not only bad politics, but also “morally offensive.” However, I doubt that he realized that the tone of his article subtly reflects the same elitist attitude that he is trying to discourage.
Focusing on Trump supporters as “disadvantaged” and deserving our “empathy, not insults” reads as: “Yes, we are better than you, and we understand why you have misguided beliefs and political positions.”
Missing is the fact that millions and millions of college-educated, financially successful Black, white and brown Americans who are not fans of Donald Trump will vote Republican based on the issues.
The notion that Mr. Trump is a threat to democracy is pure election politics. Our democracy is more at risk by undermining faith in the Supreme Court and weaponizing the judicial system against your political opponent (both recent tactics by the Democratic Party) than by a nasty, narcissistic President Trump.
The Democratic Party has swung so far left that millions of well-educated Americans will “hold their noses” and vote for Mr. Trump.
J.R. Clay
Edwards, Colo.
To the Editor:
After reading Nicholas Kristof’s excellent column, I would like to add my rationale for not demeaning the Trumpists — the news source dichotomy.
The friends I grew up and live with are mostly Trump voters; I am liberal. We have learned not to talk about politics, but there is still an inevitable loss of respect on either side (“How can any intelligent person believe that?”).
My workaround is to realize that my friends, exclusively consuming conservative social media, are getting a completely different set of facts about the world. Indeed, if we assume a set of facts, either mine or theirs, we often can come close to agreeing on many things.
I’ve given up asking them to broaden their news sources, but at least we can now respect one another as equally intelligent people living on different news planets.
Drew Sattee
Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
To the Editor:
Thank you to Nicholas Kristof for once again reminding us that if democracy is to survive we cannot automatically demean those with whom we disagree. He is absolutely right that “working-class Americans have a right to feel betrayed,” and the stories he cites should pull us up short in our condemnation.
However, it seems to this self-professed progressive that it is not at all morally offensive to demonize those Trump supporters who have reaped the benefits of what Franklin D. Roosevelt started and are thriving — those, many from working-class families, who got a good education; who have safe comfortable homes and good, often union, jobs with health care; or who have even become wealthy bosses.
These are the Trump supporters who assert that “I’ve got mine and you’re not getting a piece of it, especially if you are Black or brown or come from another nation.” They are too many of my suburban neighbors who, though comfortable and cared for, oppose efforts to build affordable housing or rail at paying taxes that benefit those less fortunate than they.
I assert that we must clearly call these people out for what they are: selfish, racist bigots like the man they support.
David S. Schwartz
Ardsley-on-Hudson, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Nicholas Kristof writes, “By all means denounce Trump, but don’t stereotype and belittle the nearly half of Americans who have sided with him.”
It seems that I read articles about “the educated and the elites” looking down on Trump supporters more than I actually hear such belittlement. Nevertheless, perhaps the reason is that many of these supporters appear to know little about the issues that concern them.
Did Mr. Kristof point out to his woman friend that while Mr. Trump failed to bring factory jobs back, President Biden has created 800,000 such jobs, with the promise of many more with bills like his CHIPS Act?
Did he explain to his haircutter the complex reasons for high food prices, and that inflation is now down to more expected levels?
Did he ask how they felt when Mr. Trump watched TV for three hours while dozens of law enforcement officers were injured as a mob he encouraged attacked the Capitol? Or when innocent poll workers’ lives were ruined when he falsely accused them of election fraud?
To the extent that it is still possible, it behooves Mr. Kristof and the rest of us to try to educate voters whose understanding of the issues may be minimal or incorrect. The stakes are too high not to.
Joseph R. Ades
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
To the Editor:
Mr. Kristof, thank you for identifying the source of the divisions among us: a lack of respect for Americans whose lives have taken different paths than our own.
Scorn is a powerful weapon — one that Donald Trump excels at wielding. But it’s one of the most painful and divisive rhetorical tools that, like sarcasm, cuts to the emotional quick and then builds scars that don’t heal.
As a divided nation, we’ve been using scorn, sarcasm and bullying to belittle one another since Donald Trump rode down his golden escalator. It’s past time to stop. Divided we will not survive, and the basest parts of human nature will be the thing that destroys our two-and-a-half-century experiment in governance.
Janet Spaulding
Stratham, N.H.
To the Editor:
This liberal doesn’t look down on those who don’t share my values, but I am puzzled by people who don’t realize that Donald Trump possesses no values at all. You need only a heart, a mind, a soul or a conscience to know this. No advanced degree or high income or elevated social status is required when basic intelligence, reason and empathy are more than enough.
I’d like to think that most Americans are capable of possessing these attributes, so it’s striking that so many people support a man who is a bigot and a sex offender, who takes pleasure in cruelty, who is utterly corrupt and a compulsive liar, and who is selfish and totally self-absorbed.
Nicholas Kristof correctly notes that some Americans (and not just Democrats) look down on others they perceive as inferior, and that is indefensible. It is not, however, a reason to empower a monster.
Jim Anderson
Santa Clarita, Calif.
A version of this article appears in print on Sept. 15, 2024, Section SR, Page 11 of the New York edition with the headline: How Democrats Treat Trumpites. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
