Opinion
Guest Essay
The Election Is in 10 Weeks. These 3 Things About the Polls Keep Me Up at Night.
Aug. 27, 2024, 5:04 a.m. ET

By Kristen Soltis Anderson
Ms. Anderson, a contributing Opinion writer, is a Republican pollster and a moderator of Opinion’s series of focus groups.
Sunday night was an unexpectedly exciting time in the Anderson household: Just after dinnertime, my husband got called and asked to participate in an election poll. I was in the middle of getting my toddler ready for bed when he rushed into the room, holding our baby in one hand and his phone in the other, now on speaker so I could hear the questions.
There’s a real thrill you get as a pollster when you get to peek behind the curtain and see how someone else in your field is asking voters what they think. But it was also a reminder of how messy social science can be. Here was my husband, telling this very nice interviewer what he thought about, among other things, immigration and Tim Walz, all while pacing the hallway bouncing a bedtime-bound infant. I can only imagine what others are up to while answering survey questions.
As we near Election Day, Americans’ interest in polls will only increase. Election forecasting models are being heavily scrutinized and debated by commentators and reporters. Small shifts in polling results can trigger big headlines. As we start this post-Democratic convention week, when analysts will be combing for any hint of a bump for Kamala Harris, it’s worth keeping in mind that there are lots of things that make polling art as much as science.
Pollsters try to get it right, but we don’t know what we don’t know, and sometimes in our industry it can feel you’re fighting the last battle. In 2012 some pollsters missed the mark and overestimated Mitt Romney’s vote share, in part because they were excluding less-likely voters or not calling enough voters on cellphones. By 2016, those issues were largely addressed, but new problems reared their heads, like some pollsters overrepresenting college graduates in their surveys, yielding poll results that were overly favorable toward Hillary Clinton, particularly in key Upper Midwest states.
Four years after that, pollsters had mostly fixed the issues that plagued them in 2016, yet in 2020 many polls “featured polling error of an unusual magnitude,” according to the American Association for Public Opinion Research’s task force on the matter. The task force was circumspect in its report on what went wrong and didn’t propose a definitive solution. And troublingly, the industry did not come away with a clear conclusion as to what went wrong, so that it could be remedied.
As a pollster, I’ll be the first person to tell you that I have a measure of apprehension about the polls this year. I mentioned last week that a couple of warning lights are starting to blink on the 2024 polls. And so an accounting of a few things that keep me up at night:

    The Trump factor. Contrary to the after-the-fact narrative, overall, the polls in 2022 were fairly good. Same in 2018. But years when Donald Trump is on the ballot simply may introduce a type of voter who participates only as a way to support or oppose him and who is, therefore, for whatever reason, unpollable.
    Unlikely likely voters. This is a related concern. In some of those prior cycle polling misses I mentioned, one problem was pollsters failing to adequately factor some groups of unlikely voters into their samples. In 2012 those voters favored Barack Obama. In 2016 and 2020 they presumably favored Mr. Trump. In a shaken-up 2024 race, it remains an open question who will benefit most from unlikely voters.
    Poll fatigue. It seems like the number of public election polls being conducted has risen as barriers to entry into the field have fallen. “Technology has disrupted polling in ways similar to its impact on journalism: by making it possible for anyone with a few thousand dollars to enter the field and conduct a national poll,” wrote Pew Research Center’s Courtney Kennedy four years ago. And that’s not counting the private polls being conducted out of public view for campaigns and clients. Getting a call from a prominent polling outfit is a big to-do in my home, but it isn’t hard to imagine a voter in a battleground state getting to late October of this year, looking at the caller ID and begging for the pain to stop.

Before we all get too deep into this election cycle, I’m imploring everyone to keep their expectations tempered, to expect the unexpected and to treat horse race polls with a level of healthy skepticism. And if a pollster does call you, consider yourself a bit lucky. Please be kind and answer.
More from Kristen Soltis Anderson

Kristen Soltis Anderson is a contributing Opinion writer, a Republican pollster, a speaker and a commentator. She is also the author of “The Selfie Vote: Where Millennials Are Leading America (and How Republicans Can Keep Up).”
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.