Verizon is down: Millions of users are hit with mass internet outage as map shows areas affected

    Users began reporting issues with fiber optic services around midnight
    An issue affecting similar localities last year was resolved after two hours 

By JAMES REYNOLDS

Published: 03:03 EST, 12 November 2024 | Updated: 06:56 EST, 12 November 2024

Millions of users have been hit by a mass internet outage affecting Verizon Fios coverage on the east coast.

Reports of outages flared between midnight and 2am EST, prompting rife complaints on social media.

A spokesperson for Verizon, responding to a user from Ashburn, Virginia, confirmed: 'There is either an outage or network maintenance impacting your area. We don't have full details just yet.

'Our apologies for any inconvenience this is causing. We're trying to get all the information from our network team so we can provide you all an update.' 

More than 40,000 instances were reported early this morning, up from fewer than 100 before the spike. 

Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Alexandria and Washington were among the most reported locations.

Fifty-three per cent of users reported issues with 5G Home internet, while 33 per cent had issues with landline.

Fourteen per cent reported a total service blackout. 

Issues were also commonly reported in Richmond, Virginia Beach, Baltimore, Arlington and Los Angeles.

Newsweek reported that 'millions' of people had experienced outages early Tuesday morning. 

To fix issues with your service, Verizon advises rebooting your router and resetting your ONT battery in the first instance.

Responding to a complaint about outages across the 'entire east coast', a spokesperson said at 03:40am EST: 'We do currently have several reports coming out of your area for service issues. 

'We do not yet have an estimated restoral time but we're working to restore services as quickly as possible.'

Outage.report acknowledged reports of issues in dozens of cities, including Miami, Lewes, LaGrange, Baltimore, Germantown, Parkville and Silver Spring.

Raleigh, Cherry Hill, Maple Shade, Sewell, Philadelphia, San Antonio, Alexandria, Annandale, Arlington, Ashburn, Fairfax and Falls Church also reported outages.

An incident in September 2023 affected some of the same regions and lasted little more than two hours before it was resolved.

'Fios' refers to Verizon's Fiber Optic Service offer.

Verizon covers about 70 per cent of the United States with LTE Service. 

A Verizon spokesperson told DailyMail.com: 'A network issue early this morning disrupted service for some Verizon Fios customers in the Northeast a short period of time. 

'As soon as the issue was identified, our engineering teams quickly restored the service.'

