Apple’s iPhone 16 Will Keep Sales Stable Until Bigger Changes Arrive

By Mark Gurman
August 11, 2024 at 8:45 AM ED

Apple’s iPhone 16 will keep sales stable until more innovative models are ready next year. Also: A smaller Mac mini is underway; iOS 18’s Photos app changes course; and why the company is moving to a plastic version of its SE watch.

Last week in Power On: Apple Intelligence has a long way to go to match the marketing hype.

The Starters

Since Apple Inc. revamped its entire iPhone line in 2020 — rolling out new designs and 5G connections — the device hasn’t had a major overhaul. And that won’t change when the iPhone 16 lineup arrives later this year.

Though last year’s iPhone 15 Pro came with a titanium shell for the first time, it was basically the same phone as its predecessor. And while the iPhone 14 Pro added the Dynamic Island — hailed as a new interface — it wasn’t really a major change from the 13 Pro, which in turn was only a minor tweak from the 12.

This year’s iPhone 16 line will fit that pattern. The four new models — likely to be called the iPhone 16, 16 Plus, 16 Pro and 16 Pro Max — won’t look meaningfully different than current versions or add major new features.

Here’s what to expect:

    The big marketing point will be Apple Intelligence, the company’s new suite of AI capabilities. All the iPhone 16 models will run Apple Intelligence, but it will also work with the iPhone 15 Pro versions. It’s hard to tell how much of an enticement this will be. As I said last week, I don’t think these features alone will be reason to upgrade.
    The non-Pro versions of the iPhone 16 will add the Action button, which was already on the higher-end versions of last year’s model. But Apple is rolling out a more customizable Control Center and changeable Lock Screen options in iOS 18, which may make the Action button less of an asset.
    Speaking of buttons, there will be a new camera control on the right side of the phone (at least on the new Pros). It will operate like a button on a DSLR camera, allowing you to press in slightly to trigger autofocus. A harder press will take the picture. You can also swipe along the button to zoom in and out while shooting photos and videos.
    Another change is probably coming only to the Pro models: slightly bigger screens. The regular Pro will move to 6.3 inches from 6.1, while the Pro Max will now approach 6.9 inches, an increase from 6.7.
    As usual, the colors will be refreshed. For the Pro, expect to see the blue replaced — along with a return of the popular rose gold from a few years ago. And there will be a new chip: the A18. All four models will now have 8 gigabytes of memory as well. That’s the minimum needed to run Apple Intelligence.

If you have an older iPhone, these are all nice upgrades — but probably not must-haves. I don't expect the new models to fuel a gold rush of purchases for Apple. And, if the latest financial guidance is any indication, the company doesn’t either. It declined to give a prediction for iPhone growth in the current quarter. If Apple had expected a meaningful bump, we probably would have gotten an indication.

But next year is certain to bring a bigger shake-up to the iPhone line. As early as the beginning of 2025, Apple will launch a new iPhone SE — the first upgrade to its low-end phone since 2022. This model will look like an iPhone 14, with a crisper OLED display that stretches across the full device. And you can also bet that it will have Apple Intelligence. 

If Apple can get the price of the new iPhone SE down to around $500, I think it could be a hot seller.

But the more important changes will appear next September with the iPhone 17. That lineup will offer a new type of smartphone — what I call the “fourth iPhone model.”

The main lineup has three major options: the standard iPhone, the Pro and the Pro Max. For years, Apple has been looking to find a fourth type of phone that will resonate with customers. In 2020, it attempted to do that by rolling out the iPhone 12 mini. The product was a commercial failure.

So the next logical move was going in the opposite direction. Apple got rid of the mini and came up with the iPhone 14 Plus, a larger version of its standard phone. Just like the mini, the Plus has also largely been a flop. One problem is the price: The iPhone 15 Plus is only $100 less than the more powerful iPhone 15 Pro, so many consumers figure it’s worth shelling out a bit more money for the better phone.

Next year, Apple will give this fourth-model concept another try. The approach this time around: a far thinner design. The idea is to create an “Air” version of the iPhone of sorts, something that sits in between the iPhone 17 and iPhone 17 Pro. The most apt comparison is probably to the original MacBook Air from over a decade ago, which was somewhere between the regular MacBook and MacBook Pro.

The sales pitch will probably go like this: If you want something snazzier than a standard iPhone — but don’t really need the performance, screen size or cameras of a Pro model — you can get something that looks much cooler while still having the specifications of a regular iPhone.

The combination of the new SE and a slim model could be good enough to return the iPhone to meaningful growth in 2025. I think the Air-style phone will at least be a bigger hit than the mini and Plus devices of recent years.

But even this slimmer entry will just be a step toward something better. Eventually, Apple will want to squeeze the power of a Pro model into this smaller design. That feat will likely take until at least 2027 to achieve. I also expect Apple to produce a foldable iPhone, but all signs internally point to a foldable iPad being just as big of a priority. That means we may still see a tablet version come sooner.

In any case, those options are still years away. In the shorter term, consumers will be facing a familiar sight: an iPhone that looks pretty similar to last year’s mode

The Bench

The Mac mini is getting a revamp with an Apple TV-sized design. In last week’s Power On, I mentioned that at least one Mac in the M4 generation would get major changes beyond just a more powerful chip. On Thursday, I reported that it will be the Mac mini. The new model will be much smaller than the current version — possibly half the size — and come in both M4 Pro and regular M4 variations. It’s set to go on sale later this year. The lower-end models will begin shipping to Apple from suppliers in August, while the M4 Pro version will be ready by October, I’m told. The new design will mark the first revamp to the Mac mini since the Steve Jobs era in 2010.

These new Mac minis, of course, are just one part of the M4 story. The company is planning new MacBook Pros and iMacs — also for as early as this fall. New MacBook Airs, meanwhile, are scheduled to arrive by the spring (around the same time as this year). A new Mac Studio and Mac Pro are also in development. I would expect both of those high-end Mac desktops to arrive in the second half of next year. A larger iMac remains something Apple is exploring as well, but it’s unclear if that will be an M4 product or something that comes the following year or later.

Apple reverses course on Photos app in iOS 18 after backlash. After the new iOS 18 and iPadOS 18 Photos app was announced, I predicted that Apple would have to rethink its approach. For such a critical and widely used app, the planned changes were probably a little too bold and potentially confusing. The main addition was a new carousel interface on top that let you pin certain memories, albums or content types. And much of the app was reorganized in a way that was guaranteed to irk some users.

So it’s perhaps no surprise that Apple removed the new carousel from the most recent beta version of iOS 18. It also tweaked the photo grid to be more user-friendly and pushed albums higher up into the app to require less scrolling. Perhaps most critically, Apple moved saved content back into the main photo grid. These changes came at a key moment: Apple now considers iOS 18 to be complete and is preparing to add the software to the upcoming iPhone 16 line.

This kind of turnabout isn’t a first for Apple. The company has reversed course on iOS design changes before, and there’s really no reason to remain stubborn and wait until after the iPhone 16 release to make a switch.

A plastic Apple Watch SE is about cutting costs and appealing to kids. Last month, I reported that Apple intends to completely revamp the low-end Watch SE. For the first time, the company will be moving this model away from aluminum and use a plastic case. In fact, this will be the first time that any Apple Watch has used a plastic shell since the initial version was introduced in 2014.

Why would Apple do this? First, I’m told that the move to plastic will lower production costs. The aluminum case for the SE costs Apple about $5 a unit. The plastic shell likely will be about half that, I’m told. That might not make a huge difference by itself, but Apple is looking for ways to get the price of the SE down. I suspect that the company might want to sell something for around $200, helping the watch compete with models from Samsung Electronics Co. Currently, the SE is $249.

Another advantage of plastic: The material allows for bolder colors than aluminum and is probably more kid-friendly. It’s no coincidence that Apple revamped its watch marketing several weeks ago to appeal to parents. With recent school phone bans, Apple has been touting its watch as a low-cost phone alternative that can help parents stay in touch with their children — and track their whereabouts.
The Schedule

Aug. 13: Google to hold an earlier-than-usual launch for new Pixel devices. The Alphabet Inc.-owned company is slated to reveal its annual device upgrades during the heart of the summer, far earlier than its usual October timing. The two likeliest reasons: Google wants to stay well clear of Apple’s launch in September, or it aims to give less time for details of the products to leak out. The event should feature the Pixel 9 phone, new Pixel Buds, a larger version of the Pixel Watch and potentially an update to the Pixel Fold.
Post Game Q&A

Q: When do you think Apple will start charging for Apple Intelligence?
Q: What is Apple’s Vision group cooking up these days?
Q: Are you surprised that Humane is a commercial failure?


Email me, ask on the Power On Discord, or you can always send me a tweet or DM @markgurman.


I’m on Signal at markgurman.01; Telegram at GurmanMark; or ProtonMail at markgurman@protonmail.com.
More from Bloomberg

Get Tech Daily and more Bloomberg Tech weeklies in your inbox:

    Cyber Bulletin for coverage of the shadow world of hackers and cyber-espionage
    Game On for a playthrough of the video game business
    Screentime for a front-row seat to the collision of Hollywood and Silicon Valley
    Soundbite for reporting on podcasting, the music industry and audio trends
    Q&AI for answers to all your questions about AI