Opinion

Michelle Goldberg
JD Vance Just Blurbed a Book Arguing That Progressives Are Subhuman
Aug. 5, 2024

In a normal political environment, there would be little need to pay attention to a new book by the far-right provocateur Jack Posobiec, who is probably best known for promoting the conspiracy theory that Democrats ran a satanic child abuse ring beneath a popular Washington pizzeria. But “Unhumans,” an anti-democratic screed that Posobiec co-wrote with the professional ghostwriter Joshua Lisec, comes with endorsements from some of the most influential people in Republican politics, including, most significantly, vice-presidential candidate JD Vance.
The word “fascist” gets thrown around a lot in politics, but it’s hard to find a more apt one for “Unhumans,” which came out last month. The book argues that leftists don’t deserve the status of human beings — that they are, as the title says, unhumans — and that they are waging a shadow war against all that is good and decent, which will end in apocalyptic slaughter if they are not stopped. “As they are opposed to humanity itself, they place themselves outside of the category completely, in an entirely new misery-driven subdivision, the unhuman,” write Posobiec and Lisec.
As they tell it, modern progressivism is just the latest incarnation of an ancient evil dating back to the late Roman Republic and continuing through the French Revolution and Communism to today. Often, they write, “great men of means” are required to crush this scourge. The contempt for democracy in “Unhumans” is not subtle. “Our study of history has brought us to this conclusion: Democracy has never worked to protect innocents from the unhumans,” write Posobiec and Lisec.
One of their book’s heroes is the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, who overthrew the democratic Second Spanish Republic in the country’s 1930s civil war. The authors call him a “great man of history” and compare him to George Washington. They quote him on what doesn’t work against the unhuman threat: “We do not believe in government through the voting booth. The Spanish national will was never freely expressed through the ballot box.”
Nakedly authoritarian ideas like this one are not uncommon in the dank corners of the reactionary internet, or among the sort of groups that led the Jan. 6 insurrection. “Unhumans” lauds Augusto Pinochet, leader of the Chilean military junta who led a coup against Salvador Allende’s elected government in 1973, ushering in a reign of torture and repression that involved tossing political enemies from helicopters.
Pinochet-inspired helicopter memes have been common in the MAGA movement for years. And as the historian David Austin Walsh wrote last year, there’s long been a cult of Franco on the right. Nevertheless, it’s extremely unusual for a candidate for vice president of the United States to openly align himself with autocratic terror.
Vance provided the first blurb on the “Unhumans” book jacket. “In the past, communists marched in the streets waving red flags. Today, they march through H.R., college campuses and courtrooms to wage lawfare against good, honest people,” he wrote. “Jack Posobiec and Joshua Lisec reveal their plans and show us what to do to fight back.”
Other endorsements come from Tucker Carlson and Donald Trump Jr., a key figure in his father’s presidential campaign. The foreword is by Stephen Bannon, Donald Trump’s former chief strategist.
Now, it is always possible that Vance recommended “Unhumans” without actually reading it, a practice that’s not unheard-of in book publishing. But unless and until he credibly distances himself from it, we should take him at his word that he shares the book’s analysis. After all, some of the language in “Unhumans” resembles his own rhetoric.
“The great American counterrevolution to depose the Cultural Marxists must occur on all terrains of society they currently possess and on those they aim to seize,” write Posobiec and Lisec, adding, “It is achievable but only with the resolve of Franco and the thoroughness of McCarthy.” (They mean Joseph McCarthy, another of the book’s icons.) Compare that to what Vance said on the alt-right podcast “Jack Murphy Live” in 2021, when he argued that Republicans, upon taking power, should purge their opponents the way Iraq’s government once purged members of Saddam Hussein’s Baath Party.
“I tend to think that we should seize the institutions of the left and turn them against the left,” said Vance. “We need like a de-Baathification program, but like a de-wokification program in the United States.” He argued that “we don’t have a real constitutional republic anymore,” suggesting that Donald Trump need not be limited by the norms of republican governance. Trump, said Vance, should “fire every single midlevel bureaucrat, every civil servant in the administrative state, replace them with our people.” And if the courts try to stand in his way, Trump should “stand before the country like Andrew Jackson did and say: ‘The chief justice has made his ruling. Now let him enforce it.’”
You can and should laugh at Vance’s melodramatic self-importance and creepy subcultural fixations. (On “Jack Murphy Live,” Vance respectfully references Curtis Yarvin, a right-wing blogger popular in reactionary Silicon Valley circles who calls for replacing democracy with a sort of techno-monarchy.) It’s good that Democrats have found, in the epithet “weird,” simple language to describe the 4Chan side of the Republican Party. But in the Venn diagram between “weird” and “dangerous,” there’s a lot of overlap.
“Much like the United States founding fathers, Franco and his fellows saw themselves as rebels intended to overthrow a corrupt, tyrannical government that aided and abetted murder and rape as well as other repugnant sins,” write Posobiec and Lisec. We should take seriously the possibility that Vance and his fellows see themselves the same way.

The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.
Michelle Goldberg has been an Opinion columnist since 2017. She is the author of several books about politics, religion and women’s rights, and was part of a team that won a Pulitzer Prize for public service in 2018 for reporting on workplace sexual harassment. 

Select comments

Nobody, the Blinder
United StatesAug. 5

I was born in 2001. I was six months old when the Twin Towers went down. I grew up with a love of history instilled into me by my late grandfather, who passed away in my freshman year in college. Because of him, I recognized what was coming when, at the age of 15, I watched, voteless and voiceless, as angry old men and women who looked fondly upon the 'Good old days' of McCarthy and Jim Crow propelled Donald Trump into office in a desperate attempt to preserve a flawed America.

I could already see where we were headed.

Four years later, halfway through earning a history degree, I canvassed for Democrats and cast my vote for Joe Biden, knowing what another Trump term would bring. When others celebrated Biden's victory, I remained silent, knowing how quickly our enemy would shed the trappings of democracy if they proved inconvenient. When J6ers stormed stormed the Capital Building, I was shocked but unsurprised. My very first time participating in the democracy I was raised to revere ended with a crowd of my elders attempting to silence my voice because they didn't like the hat they were hearing.

I think that was when I knew that movements like that don't disappear overnight; that I would be fighting this exhausting battle for the rest of my life. Daunting as it seemed, I promised myself I wouldn't shrink from it.

Now the man who would be VP endorses the notion that I'm not even human. Untermensch.

I am getting so tired of being right. But tired or not, I will still fight.

Hallucigenia
ChicagoAug. 5

If you don't see the other side of the electorate as human, you don't belong anywhere near elected office, no matter what level it is. At some point, we need to criminalize treasonist political speech like this--at least to the extent that it disqualifies from office. Being nakedly anti-American like this should have consequences.

Bill W. Vermont
VTAug. 5

Trump took a chance on Vance and he may have gotten more than he bargained for, more than he can understand, and more than he can control. These men are dangerous.

Vance's hate filled messaging and theology don't match up with the Beatitudes, the Golden & Silver Rules, and the 10 Commandments. They do add up to 30 pieces of silver.

Mark Keller
Portland, OregonAug. 5

Along with the frightening fact of JD Vance's "Unhumans" endorsement, I nominate another word that describes even the slight possibility that Mr. Vance might be a heartbeat away from the presidency:

Dystopian.

W. Jackson
MontanaAug. 5

I guess the difference between Trump and Vance and these dictators back in the day is that Pinochet and Franco had to work to take power. They never had the benefit of FoxNews and X to do the work for them.

Alfred Yul
DubaiAug. 6

Why do you assume that Vance may not have read the book he is promoting? He clearly has and has routinely echoed the same ideas over the last few years. He is worse than dangerous to civil society and democratic norms. Americans must understand what the GOP ticket really represents in this year's election. On the brighter side, it appears millions are finally starting to sense the horrors Republicans would like to visit on the country should they win. Democrats need to smartly telegraph the Republican menace to the voters in the next few months. Vote Blue across the board!

DavidCT
CTAug. 6

If you had any doubt that Trump had lost his grip his choice of Vance should convince you. A man who could choose such a running mate is not fit to be President.

C. M. Kay
Chapel Hill, NCAug. 5

@Nobody, the Blinder 
As I reach the end of my seventh decade, I have been in some despair these last 8 years at the direction our country has gone (with a correction in 2020).  

Today, I am encouraged by your comments and I hope you will be encouraged by mine and of many others who know and want you to know that there are many, many more of us who see this wonderful nation as a beacon on a hill rather than the dystopia that the far right wants us to see so that they may seize control.  

Trump will appeal to the basest of our instincts and hope to use us to further his wretched goals of self-promotion and self-preservation.  JD Vance is the latest disappointment and there may be more to come but we must be resolute about protecting all that is good and honorable about ourselves.  May your days be filled with hope and joy - traits that I am so glad VP Harris is bringing to the elections.

Castro
TasmaniaAug. 5

To any student of history, none of this should be surprising at all.  Autocrats in coming to power, by other than Democratic means, always broadcast exactly what they plan on doing, knowing that in their opposition ("enemy" to their base), they have people that will play by the rules, and not believe what they are hearing.  And, the messaging, the signalling, is all about firing up their followers for a battle to come, not winning votes.

Start with that premise, and Trump's performance at the NABJ was not a "disaster", but rather a tour de force - a clear demonstration to his followers that he is worthy to lead, willing to walk into the lion's den as it were.  Again, if your starting premise is a coming to power via a mechanism other than the ballot box, JD Vance's, and other Republican leaders' utterances make perfect sense, and give all the appearance of a well-thought through, cogent communication plan.  For example, no GOP leader of any standing has yet to state that they would accept the result of a vote in which Trump loses.

The National Socialists came to power in German in the 1930's with less support than polls indicate Trump/MAGA have now.  The Republicans/MAGA are telling America, repeatedly and clearly, that they are seeking permanent, minority rule, and will respect neither voting outcomes, nor democratic norms in their quest.  And if anyone has put forward a plan to deal with this, the many friends of America around the world would sure love to hear it.

Sean Cunningham
San Mateo County, CAAug. 6

Shouldn’t something like this be disqualifying?

Man, I long for the days of the tan suit.

Fred
NJAug. 6

This is going to be a very unpleasant few months of campaigning. I cannot stand listening to Vance. He has a complete lack of respect for other people's opinions. Is it so hard to have a respectful discussion about policy disagreements? Why resort to name calling?

paul
Mt. Shasta,CAAug. 6

This is terrific fodder for the Harris campaign, which needs to remind voters that the guy that endorses Pizzagate Guy, as welll as Alex Jones, is but a heartbeat away from the presidency if the 78 y.o. DJT returns.

TK
WisconsinAug. 5

Authoritarian ideas, and those that espouse them, are disturbingly mainstream in our country (and beyond). If they weren't, nearly half the voting population wouldn't be considering a vote for Trump (nor would enough of them done so to put him in office in 2016). 

Let's make sure it's soundly defeated at the ballot box this November, because if not, well, just take a look at Project 2025 to see what the American future holds.

Time to engage, if you haven't in the past - read, post, question, discuss, challenge - and VOTE. Might be some uncomfortable conversations with family, neighbors, friends, etc. I, and hope many, will be able to say we were not silent, and fought hard for a better America.

Shelley
MarylandAug. 6

I believe these people are capable, ready and willing to perpetrate what is described in this book and that they have been contemplating doing so for generations. This is the moment they have been waiting for.
I live among these people. I am very familiar with their mindset. They have not one shred of empathy. They believe they should own everything and control everyone. Terrorism brings them joy.

Peter
New YorkAug. 5

@Nobody, the Blinder We share a similar path. I was born 3 weeks before 9/11 and I, too, watched in horror as Donald Trump ascended the political ladder to first win the GOP nomination, defying all odds, and then ultimately win the election. The night of that 2016 election, I cried for many of the reasons you describe. That was 8 years ago and I have since turned my sorrow that evening into action, getting involved in various areas of government from NGOs, campaigns, etc. 

We are going to win this election; I feel confident about that. But this scourge doesn't end on election night. It is going to be up to people like us--passionate, motivated, energetic--to deliver our country from the hands of authoritarianism. 

Proud to be in the fight with you and all the other Gen-Zers reading this column.

George
NYCAug. 5

Absolutely amazing that Americans are poised to put this guy "a heartbeat away".

Absolutely amazing.

CatPerson
Columbus, OHAug. 5

So much ammunition!  I really hope that Kamala has a team of people responding *humorously* to these outrageous ideas.  My mantra is make fun of these guys because Trump HATES to be mocked.  So much material to work with.

Just T
VirginiaAug. 5

"The book argues that leftists don’t deserve the status of human beings, that they are, as the title says, unhumans . . ."

This is a chilling thought, and should be a sobering one to Democrats, all of whom Vance, Trump, and their ilk seek to portray in a similar vein.

"Unhuman" was how European antisemites portrayed Jews to justify the Holocaust; "unhuman" was how Americans portrayed black people, Native peoples, and Asians, to justify slavery, Jim Crow laws, genocide and other forms of discrimination; and even poor white people -- the people Trump and Vance claim they're going to help -- have been portrayed as less than human by those who sought to exploit or exclude them.

The portrayal of any group as not human is rhetoric all Americans should not merely shrug off or laugh at as "weird," but also heed as deliberate and dangerous.

Victor
YokohamaAug. 5

I did not attend the Republican Convention but from what I have read it was all about evil, security, God, and selling stuff.  The absence of intelligent thinking was apparent with the presence of Ron Johnson, Kristi Noem, Tucker Carlson, and of course Mariorie Taylor-Greene.  And when it was all over they chose a man who had denied the results of an election, been convicted as a felon, was ordered to pay $83 million to a woman he defamed (and raped), incites hatred, and stole sensitive national documents.  And this very same crowd has the temerity to tell us he is going to save America.  Well, God save America from MAGA is more like it.

Ockham9
Norman, OklahomaAug. 6

My chief concern with the word-of-the-day, ‘weird,’ is that it doesn’t fully convey the serious threat we face. When we describe Vance and Trump as ‘weird,’ we may be suggesting that they are eccentric, or perhaps unconventional, strange, odd, maybe uncanny. But lots of people walking around in public are all of those things, and I do not worry that they constitute a threat to my freedoms. I do worry that in trying to ridicule Trump and Vance and their ideas, we lull ourselves into the blissful state that fails to appreciate the true malevolence of the MAGA movement. Franco’s heavy hand on Spain lasted 50 years. I don’t want my children’s and grandchildren’s lives stunted by a similar authoritarian regime.

theresa
nyAug. 6

Reporters cannot let him or Trump wriggle out of answering questions about their authoritarian beliefs. This is serious business and our democracy is at stake.

Emily
MichiganAug. 5

Anyone who has been paying attention has been able to see this coming for years now, and I'm tired of being told it's hyperbolic to think that way when it becomes more and more apparent that it isn't. It should alarm everyone that people who simply go to work, take care of their families, and who vote for policies to make those things easier for everyone are being painted as subhuman. 

How is it subhuman to believe in equitable human rights for all those who just want to freely go about their lives as they desire without hurting others? That's not a rhetorical question by any means, but it should be, and may as well be if you're asking it of those who willingly, joyously, and voraciously inhale and then parrot the lies of the right.

XXX
Somewhere in the U.S.A.Aug. 6

It's not clear what Trump's strategy is with Vance. He already has the base. Vance can't help him at all outside the base. Maybe the purpose of Vance is to generate tunrout by the base.

But to Michelle's point: this is today's Republican party. The fascism is a feature, not a bug.

As for freedom, the Republican Party never cared about *political* freedom. They cared about (supposedly) free *markets.*

Once the Soviet Union went down, they could, and did, become pro-Russian. People think that's a change. It is not. They are not for political freedom, and never were.

Richard Blaine
Not NYCAug. 5

In a normal world, the disclosure that Mr. Vance wrote an endorsement of such a book would be immediately disqualifying.
.
In a normal world, any normal political party would now insist, indeed demand, that he relinquish the nomination as the nominee for vice-president.
.
But we no longer live in a normal world.

Tom Debley
Walnut Creek, CAAug. 6

Weird, weirder, and weirdest.

Ann
Ann
CaliforniaAug. 6

Anyone who lionizes Spain's  Franco and Chile's Pinochet is not in touch with the reality of millions who suffered under their dictatorships.  Caring Americans cannot let this country get further sullied by those who advocate for dictatorships, the destruction of government, and out right war on fellow citizens.

Larry C
CaliforniaAug. 6

All one has to do is look at history to see that dehumanizing a group, a culture or a race is followed by oppression,  incarceration, even genocide.

Kalpana
CAAug. 5

What I want to see from the NYT and other mainstream news media is direct and persistent questioning of this criminal Republican presidential candidate and his running mate on this particular book and the Project 2025 policy ideas. The problem is that these things are revealed in an opinion column, which is esoteric in nature, and does not make the rounds of network television or the NPR. This election puts a very serious burden on the voters, however, I think the journalists have even bigger of a burden of actually revealing the true colors of these candidates and strip them of their fake identities. The reason the fascist movement has grown so much in this country is because of journalists have failed to do their job. In a hypocritical quest to stay neutral, they have hidden the threat today's GOP poses to the very existence of our country. Why has nobody put this book or the Project 2025 in front of Mitch McConnell or Mitt Romney and asked them to explain their support of trump? Why have they not persistently questioned the Republican lawmakers on why they continue to support a criminal as their nominee? Ask them point blank who the enemy they want to destroy? When are journalists going to hold the politicians responsible and accountable for their lies and their hunger for power?

Ryan
OntarioAug. 6

The word weird doesn't totally summarize the characters of J.D. and Trump. Maybe weird and creepy better describes them.

Tom
Show Low, AZAug. 6

Just to remind everybody that if Trump wins and sometime during the next four years becomes unable to fulfill the duties of his office, we will have a President JD Vance,  God help us!

Justin
Portland, ORAug. 6

The more I read about Jesus, the more it's clear he resembles a progressive mindset. Far-right activists might see themselves as religious, but there is nothing Jesus-like about them.

Philip Brown
AustraliaAug. 6

There were no philosophical steps - and only a few engineering ones - between the "Nazis" use of "untermenschen" (lesser men) and Auschwitz.  The gap between a book titled "Unhuman" and "re-education" and death camps is no wider.  Vance has let slip his mask and revealed his vision.  It is evil.  But it is also Trump's vision.

The book is "hate speech" in all but name.  Although its attack is upon ideas as much as an identifiable group.  Ideas are suppressed via the "thought police" or the "Stasi".

America, be warned.

Kagetora
New YorkAug. 6

The enemy is not Trump.  The enemy is the people among us who vote for Trump.  It's like "Lord of the Flies." We're fighting the basest, most selfish and animalistic impulses in ourselves.

Alice
OregonAug. 6

I mean, I already knew I wasn’t a human because I’m a woman, but…wow.  
So much for being “pro-life.”  
The only humans are the fetuses?

James
New YorkAug. 5

The kind of language used in this book, endorsed by Vance and other Republicans, is an incitement to undertake genocide or crimes against humanity. I believe there are laws about this kind of incitement and I’d certainly label it as evil.

J
MaineAug. 5

We have a chance this fall to push this dangerous man away from power. History will judge us if we don't take it.

Old sailor
SoCalAug. 5

Vance's endorsement of this book places him far worse than Trump.    How can any rational American voter cast a vote for this team that finds approximately 50% of Americans, their fellow citizens, "unhuman".

Haven't we seen this before when one group of society is marked as "unhuman"?   IS it possible that this has been totally forgotten?

Enough
USAAug. 5

@TK -- It's not half the voting public. Look at the Republican primaries and Nikki Haley -- the support for Donald Trump is inflated but that's not going to stop them claiming victory when they lose again. And the violence is going to escalate because these men want power by any means possible. And they will take it if we let them.

Nick A
Hudson ValleyAug. 6

For all their flag-waving jingoism, MAGAs detest everything that makes America great, and will stop at nothing to tear it apart.

They are an extraordinarily dangerous cult.

Larry Figdill
VAAug. 6

This should be in a headline, not just an opinion piece. Factual and highly newsworthy. People everywhere need to know.

Robert A
TNAug. 6

And no one is surprised. Vote BLUE.

cjm
KansasAug. 6

I always wonder why people want to right down their treasonous plans in book form, but it is nice to have irrefutable evidence for the inevitable trials.

gloria
San DiegoAug. 6

I hope Biden team is preparing to use ALL the powers the supreme court just gave him to deal with the havoc that will come when Kamala beats Trump.

deedee
New York, NYAug. 5

I worry about "wierd" describing this kind of thing.  I suppose that for certain suburban middle-of-the-roaders it's descrediting.  But I'd rather call it for what it is:  Un-American, anti-Democratic, fascistic, corporatist, Know-Nothingism, and other such epithets. In other columns we have been adjured not to attack, but converse calmly with these people.  I wish we could and that it might lead somewhere, but I don't think it's possible.

Robert Vukovic
Robert Vukovic
Los AngelesAug. 6

In order to do to other human beings what is required in war, a combat soldier must first learn to dehumanize the enemy. 

I fear that's what's happening here.

Steve
Multi-stateAug. 5

Thank you for this! As shown by Vance's participation in this book, and statements he's made: He believes that violent, deadly, fascist tactics should be used in the United States. 

Maybe the Wall Street Journal, and Fox, will finally report on this too.

Twin Cities
St. Paul, MNAug. 6

I personally doubt Vance read the book.  Ditto for Jr.  Rather, they engender the very definition of the modern G.O.P.:  follow.  A right-wing ideologue publishes a new manifesto, then endorse it.  A right-wing candidate vies for the Senate in Ohio, then support him.  A fanatical governor in Florida encodes blatantly offensive new laws, cheer him on.

The new G.O.P. is the precursor of America's version of Stalinism.  Purges thus don't just coincide with the modern G.O.P.  Rather, they define it.

Ironpaw
Springfield VAAug. 6

“Francisco Franco, who overthrew the democratic Second Spanish Republic in the country’s 1930s civil war. The authors call him a ‘great man of history’ and compare him to George Washington. They quote him on what doesn’t work against the unhuman threat:
‘We do not believe in government through the voting booth. The Spanish national will was never freely expressed through the ballot box.’”

It seems the Generalissimo anticipated Trump & the Republican platform.
One can hope that National Lampoon anticipated Franco’s influence by often reprinting a picture of him with a speech bubble declaring, “I’m still dead.”

Asking4Higher
NotMyFloridaAug. 5

The Pinochet admiring crowd is very much alive and well in So Fla and they are all Trump Loyalists now.
I worked for a man that flew for the murderous dictator, anyone not a Trump supporter was labelled a “Communist and I don’t like Communists!” I was stunned that a man with that past was allowed to immigrate to the US.

