Harris Tells the Business Community: I’m Friendlier Than Biden

The vice president on Wednesday proposed an increase on the capital gains tax that was far less than what President Biden has floated, one of several moves meant to win over business owners.

By Nicholas NehamasAndrew Duehren and Reid J. Epstein

Nicholas Nehamas reported from North Hampton, N.H., and Andrew Duehren and Reid J. Epstein from Washington.

    Sept. 4, 2024Updated 5:35 p.m. ET

Vice President Kamala Harris on Wednesday sought to put daylight between herself and President Biden on tax policy, making it the first issue on which she is trying to stand apart from an administration in which she holds a key role.

Stepping up her efforts to win over the business community, Ms. Harris announced that she would increase the capital gains tax at a far lower rate than what Mr. Biden had proposed — a move that came after pressure from her campaign’s biggest donors to back off some of its most aggressive tax proposals.

Ms. Harris’s proposal, which she introduced at a campaign event in New Hampshire, was directed squarely at business owners and wealthier Americans who are skeptical of Democrats and have gravitated toward former President Donald J. Trump. In the same speech, she rolled out her new plan for an expanded tax break for start-ups.

Mr. Biden had proposed taxing capital gains at 39.6 percent for Americans who make more than $1 million a year. Ms. Harris said on Wednesday that she would tax investment income for those Americans at a rate of 28 percent, a reversal from her earlier support for the tax increases included in the White House budget released this spring.

“If you earn a million dollars a year or more, the tax rate on your long-term capital gains will be 28 percent under my plan,” Ms. Harris said at a brewery in North Hampton, N.H. “Because we know when the government encourages investment, it leads to broad-based economic growth and it creates jobs, which makes our economy stronger.”

Ms. Harris’s proposed rate of 28 percent does not include an additional surtax on investment income, according to two people familiar with the campaign’s proposal. One of those people said a 5 percent surtax would apply on top of the 28 percent, bringing the total rate to 33 percent. With the surtax, Mr. Biden’s proposal would have raised the top capital-gains rate to 44.6 percent. The top capital-gains tax rate now is 23.8 percent, inclusive of a 3.8 percent surtax.

Nicholas Nehamas is a Times political reporter covering the presidential campaign of Vice President Kamala Harris. More about Nicholas Nehamas More about Nicholas Nehamas

Andrew Duehren covers tax policy for The Times from Washington. More about Andrew Duehren

Reid J. Epstein covers campaigns and elections from Washington. Before joining The Times in 2019, he worked at The Wall Street Journal, Politico, Newsday and The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. More about Reid J. Epstein
