Opinion

Binyamin Appelbaum
Plan Beats No Plan
Aug. 24, 2024, 7:00 a.m. ET

By Binyamin Appelbaum

Mr. Appelbaum is a member of the editorial board.

This isn’t a policy election. There’s no defining issue like tax cuts in 2000 or health care in 2008 or trade in 2016. Democrats are focused on convincing voters that Donald Trump poses an existential threat to the American way of life, and vice versa. But policy remains the purpose of politics, and the choice of a president is also the choice of a housing policy.

Kamala Harris has a plan to address the nation’s housing crisis. Donald Trump (kind of) has one, too. And the differences say a lot about the two candidates.

Housing prices across the country have soared in recent years, dramatically outpacing income growth. Finding an affordable place to live is no longer a problem confined to a few big coastal cities. Millions of Americans cannot buy a place to call home. They cannot settle into a neighborhood, or move to a new city to take a better job.

Binyamin Appelbaum is the lead writer on economics and business for The Times editorial board. He is based in Washington. @BCAppelbaum • Facebook 



















































































    Reader PicksAll

Peter Hartranft commented 1 hour ago
P
Peter Hartranft
Newark, DE1h ago

I might say that maybe the problem is not supply and the need for 3 million new homes. There are already 7-8 million homes unused. They are called second homes, and policies encourage hoarding. How many toilets do people need to own?
FunkyIrishman commented 51 minutes ago
FunkyIrishman
FunkyIrishman
member of the Liberal majority51m ago

"This isn’t a policy election." 
What? Rare, but you lost me with the very first line. 

There are so, so many policies that are diametrically opposite in tone, functionality and results that the republican group (no longer a functioning national party of any kind) and Democrats are offering. 

All of those policies by Democrats offer a type of freedom, and the republicans offer the complete opposite. 

That could include first and foremost bodily autonomy, but also in regards to owning a home (and the slant of this column) I don't know about you, but $25,000 towards owning a new home is a lot of money and that is a POLICY initiative that a Harris administration will be offering. 

We KNOW what is driving the housing prices: everyone wanting to turn their properties and secondary properties into a short term rental. 

That could be a private citizen or the massive hedge funds that started buying up all home stock for pennies on the dollar (with the help of banks) from the last housing crisis.

I would point out that Kamala Harris (as Attorney General of California held her ground and got 20 billion dollars in compensation for homeowners from said banks) 

There is plenty of homes for people out there, but the above coupled with NIMBYism, and developers tailoring what they are building, that everything is being squeezed for profit. 

First time home buyers will get a break under a Democratic administration and that is good policy.
C commented 39 minutes ago
C
C
Heartland39m ago

@Peter Hartranft And not only second (third, fourth) homes. I may be convinced that many more homes need to be constructed, but it is also clearly not JUST a problem of supply. There’s the Airbnb’s and homes being bought up by huge financial interests just to drive up home prices and rents for Americans who actually need the places to live. Let’s attack that too.
BM commented 57 minutes ago
B
BM
Michigan57m ago

Instead of spending trillions to colonize the moon and Mars, why not redirect that money and effort towards creative housing solutions?  Claw back all that unspent ARPA money and do the same.  All we seem to be doing with that money now is throwing it away on projects that mean nothing.  IRA money?  Instead of spending it on bike paths and hiking trails, housing is a better idea.

We have the means, just not the political will.
George commented 34 minutes ago
G
George
NYC34m ago

If there's one thing above all that concerns me with this essay it is the presumption that the construction of new homes envisions millions of single-family "starter" homes.

On one hand I'm not sure how this addresses the housing shortages in existing cities and suburbs where the housing shortage is concentrated.

Moreover, this envisions continuing the sprawl development where we put more development onto both agricultural and virgin land requiring the vast infrastructure of highways, utilities, shopping centers, schools etc.

Haven't we been there and done that enough in the 100 years since the automobile first opened up empty land for "development"?

Yes, we obviously have a "housing crisis" today in that demand exceeds supply.

But if we continue to foster sprawl development -- now out to far exurban regions -- we will create an even greater problem.

If we are indeed wising up to the environmental dangers imposed by unchecked development and truly want to address the dangers we will focus on building housing -- particularly "starter" housing -- in our existing cities and suburbs.
House In The Woods commented 31 minutes ago
House In The Woods
House In The Woods
Ottawa31m ago

It is certainly an issue that more housing is needed. However, when ‘zoning and regulations’ are cited as a main cause, without clarification, it is very dangerous. Good zoning and planning allows building in areas safe from flooding and helps mitigate storm water runoff. Good zoning and planning provides good transportation, parks, and recreational options. Good zoning and planning allows for affordable housing options. Solid code regulations mean building for the future, not just building so quickly and cheaply that homes need constant upkeep and are unsustainable in energy consumption.

We need to keep in mind that homes and our towns and cities are not consumable products, they are our homes and where we live.
Ellen commented 21 minutes ago
E
Ellen
NY21m ago

Disagree---This election, at least for every woman I know, is about abortion. That's the policy issue people are talking about.
MarkS commented 31 minutes ago
M
MarkS
San Diego31m ago

Harris has a plan with meat and bones, a solid start upon which to build. Trump, despite strong potential bipartisan support, failed in four years to even put forth an infrastructure bill … and this from a guy who thinks he’s a builder, not actually somebody who slaps his name on stuff. It took Biden, Democrats and McConnell to get the much needed infrastructure bill done.
Trump is selling hatred and fear, the oldest, cheapest form of politics. And his act is so tired. 
Harris will face proper scrutiny, starting now, and will respond intelligently. Trump will lie and obfuscate, because it’s all he knows.
The choice could not be clearer and I think Harris will steadily pull away in coming weeks.
Kathy commented 11 minutes ago
K
Kathy
SF11m ago

@Peter Hartranft My parents built a summer house on a mountain lake. It was a second home. Not part of the problem. People need housing where they work and where their communities are.
Scott commented 32 minutes ago
S
Scott
Mn32m ago

When was the last time any Republicans went to a site where new housing was being built or old housing was being updated?
The foreman may be Anglo but the music blaring is Spanish.  The workers are talking Spanish, and they are both male and female.
Much of America’s housing is being built by the immigrants, legal and not.  
Relaxing controls on immigration and allowing more young families with willing and able workers to enter our country will help with a virtuous cycle of allowing more housing to be created and have a growing economy.
And, who knows.  Maybe the children of those hardworking individuals will be the next generation of doctors, engineers, nurses, teachers and maybe even President. 
Only in America.  If we will it.
Henry commented 30 minutes ago
Henry
Henry
MA30m ago

Many cities and states have moved forward on their own to spur development of multi-unit construction. 

In California, Governor Newsom has pushed multiple bills to relax barriers to denser housing. One significant change would relax parking requirements near major transit hubs. Individual cities like San Jose, San Francisco, and San Diego have already eliminated and reduced parking requirements for commercial and residential development.

In Massachusetts, the state has passed a law requiring cities and towns to set aside at least one zoning district that allows multi-unit housing near transit stops. The law requires that the districts have no age restrictions and be suitable for parents and families.

I don't have a lot of faith that national policies are the answer to essentially local problems. It is good to see, however, the ideas trickle up from localities that already being put in practice.
Realist commented 29 minutes ago
R
Realist
DC Area29m ago

@George, the article specifically mentions allowing Fanni and Freddi to lend a larger percentage of the builder’s cost of constructing multi-family buildings.





