Election Live Updates: Harris Picks Up Backing of National Security Officials

More than 700 members of the national security and military communities endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris. North Carolina’s Democratic nominee for governor called Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson “unfit” a day after former President Donald J. Trump was silent on the embattled Republican.

Here’s the latest on the presidential race.

Hundreds of current and former national security officials, including retired members of the military, endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris on Sunday, the latest example of defense and diplomatic officials from both parties pledging her their support. The endorsement came as Ms. Harris headed to New York for a fund-raiser and former President Donald J. Trump had no scheduled campaign appearances.

With the election just over six weeks away, Ms. Harris pressed Mr. Trump to participate in a second debate next month, an offer he has refused, saying at a rally in North Carolina on Saturday that “it’s just too late,” with early voting already underway in a few states. Ms. Harris received better reviews after their first debate this month, but their sparring did little to shift the race, which appears essentially tied.

There are 44 days until Election Day. Here’s what else to know:

    Robinson remarks loom: Josh Stein, the attorney general of North Carolina and Democratic nominee for governor, told CNN that his Republican opponent, Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson, was “absolutely unfit” to lead the state. It was his first major interview since CNN reported that Mr. Robinson had called himself a “black NAZI” and defended slavery years ago on a pornographic forum. Mr. Trump, who once described Mr. Robinson as “Martin Luther King on steroids,” made no mention of Mr. Robinson or the scandal surrounding him during the rally on Saturday.

    Vance with Carlson: Senator JD Vance of Ohio, Mr. Trump’s running mate, appeared with the right-wing talk show host Tucker Carlson at an event in Hershey, Pa., on Saturday, two weeks after Mr. Carlson aired and praised the views of an author who falsely claimed that the Holocaust was not premeditated genocide. Mr. Vance defended his decision to do the interview by saying that Republicans believe in free speech and debate. He added, “Tucker Carlson is not affiliated with the campaign, so I don’t think what Tucker Carlson does is a distraction or is not.”

    The politics of motherhood: The presidential race has exposed a fault line in U.S. political culture over the deeply personal decision to have children. As prominent Republicans, including Mr. Vance, have tied their concerns about reproduction to the declining birthrate in the United States, they have disparaged women like Ms. Harris, who has stepchildren but not biological children, hoping to appeal to voters who may see an existential value in motherhood. With an election likely to be decided by razor-thin margins, motherhood itself has become a campaign-trail cudgel.

    Political violence: After two apparent assassination attempts against Mr. Trump, it might be easy to think that politics is growing more violent. But by some key measures, instances of extremist violence have actually declined in recent years, and while some Americans continue to say they approve of political violence, support for the most serious types of such violence has not increased this year. Neither apocalyptic political rhetoric nor extraordinary events over the past few years have produced eruptions of political violence like those feared by many after the Capitol attack on Jan. 6, 2021.

Former President Donald J. Trump said in an interview published online Sunday that he did not envision himself running for president in 2028 if he loses this year. “I think that that will be it,” Trump told Sharyl Attkisson, the host of a program on Sinclair Broadcast Group television stations. “I don’t see that at all. Hopefully we’re going to be successful.”

At 78, Trump would already be the oldest presidential-elect in U.S. history if he wins in November. Joseph R. Biden Jr. was 77 when he beat Trump in 2020.

Two national polls released this morning show Kamala Harris ahead of Donald Trump. An NBC News poll found her leading by five points among registered voters, 49 percent to 44 percent. A CBS News poll found her leading 52 percent to 48 percent among likely voters.

More than 700 current and former national security officials back Harris.

Vice President Kamala Harris received the endorsement of current and former national security officials on Sunday.Credit...Kenny Holston/The New York Times

More than 700 current and former national security leaders, as well as former military officials, endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris in a letter released on Sunday, arguing that only she had the temperament and values needed to serve as commander in chief.

The signatories of the letter, which was organized by the group National Security Leaders for America, included former secretaries of state and secretaries of defense, former ambassadors and retired generals. They argued that former President Donald J. Trump posed a threat to both national security and the United States’ democratic system.

Among the most prominent names were the former defense secretaries Chuck Hagel, a Republican who served under President Barack Obama; William Cohen, a Republican who served under President Bill Clinton; and William J. Perry, a Democrat who served under Mr. Clinton.

The former secretaries of state Hillary Clinton and John Kerry, and the former defense secretary Leon Panetta, also signed the letter, though their support for Ms. Harris was already clear.

The retired military leaders who signed included Rear Adm. Michael E. Smith, the president of the organization that released the letter, and Gen. Michael V. Hayden, who led the C.I.A. under President George W. Bush.

“This election is a choice between serious leadership and vengeful impulsiveness,” the letter said. “It is a choice between democracy and authoritarianism. Vice President Harris defends America’s democratic ideals, while former President Donald Trump endangers them.”

It continued: “We do not make such an assessment lightly. We are trained to make sober, rational decisions,” and added: “We know effective leadership requires in-depth knowledge, careful deliberation, understanding of your adversaries and empathy for those you lead. It requires listening to those with expertise and not firing them when they disagree with you.”

Mr. Trump’s campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Gov. Jared Polis of Colorado, a Democrat, refuted former President Trump’s repeated false claims that the state’s third largest city, Aurora, had an apartment building “taken over” by Venezuelan gangs. He cited local police data showing that crimes are down by 17.2 percent in 2024 compared with the last year. “I feel like we turned the corner” on organized crime, he said.

Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, told CBS that he does not have faith that the heads of the C.I.A., F.B.I. and other agencies would fully disclose information regarding the recent assassination attempt on former President Donald Trump, though he said he trusts “rank and file” agents “in the field.” 

The statement echoed those of Trump’s running mate, Senator JD Vance. Rubio added that he did not trust the “mid-level” management in such agencies, claiming there was “a history in the past of their being biased.”

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, urged Nebraska legislators to change their state’s rules to reward all electoral votes to the statewide winner of the presidential election, rather than one to the winner of each congressional district — a change that could be decisive in November. “To my friends in Nebraska, that one electoral vote could be the difference between Harris being president or not,” he said on NBC.

Senator John Fetterman, Democrat of Pennsylvania, laughed off JD Vance’s claim that Democratic rhetoric was to blame for assassination attempts against Donald Trump. “Who’s actually listening to what Vance says?” he said on NBC.

“He has developed the kind of reputation to say dumb things, pointless things, and offend everybody, and he’s been picked as the most unpopular pick in history, but no one’s listening to him,” Fetterman said. “I’m certainly not.” He added that Democrats had broadly condemned political violence.

Gov. Doug Burgum of North Dakota, a former Republican presidential candidate and now a surrogate for Donald Trump, said without evidence on Fox News that Hamas was avoiding agreeing to a peace deal because it believed it could get a better deal under a Harris administration, suggesting that Kamala Harris might pay Hamas “a billion dollars a hostage.”

Josh Stein, the attorney general of North Carolina and Democratic nominee for governor, gave his first major interview since CNN reported that his Republican opponent, Mark Robinson, had called himself a “black NAZI” and made other extreme comments on a pornography site. “Mark Robinson is absolutely unfit to be the governor of North Carolina,” he said on CNN. “That was true before your story broke last Thursday. The story has only served to underline and put an exclamation point on that fact.”

Stein emphasized Robinson’s ties to Donald Trump, as have many Democrats who hope for ripple effects in the presidential race. “Candidates up and down the ballot in North Carolina need to be held accountable for supporting Mark Robinson,” he said. “They have been supporting him, and now it looks like folks want to run away from him, but they have lifted — Mark Robinson could not exist without the support of Donald Trump.”

Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, defended former President Donald Trump’s remark last week that Jews would be to blame if he loses in November, in a tense exchange with the CNN host Jake Tapper. Cotton avoided answering Tapper’s question on whether he was comfortable with Trump’s rhetoric and gave his own interpretation of the comments, saying Trump was simply urging Jewish voters who are supportive of Israel to vote for him.

“Joe Biden has not backed Israel very much over the last 11 months, and Kamala Harris has been much worse,” Cotton said. “She treats Benjamin Netanyahu like a schoolchild, and she’s an assistant principal who’s constantly scolding him.”

Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan downplayed the Teamsters’ decision not to endorse a presidential candidate, and an internal poll of members that Donald Trump won by a large margin. Speaking on CNN, she pointed to the local Teamsters chapters that subsequently endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris, and she noted that the Biden administration had provided billions of dollars to save union members’ pensions.

Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, a prominent Democratic surrogate, responded on CNN to former President Donald J. Trump’s assertion that women would “no longer be thinking about abortion” if he were elected. “This guy just doesn’t understand what the average woman is confronting in her life in this country, and how could he? He’s not lived a normal life,” she said. “Unlike Kamala Harris, who has worked hourly jobs, who knows how important it is that women have health care and access to the medical care that they need.”

News Analysis
The politics of motherhood become a campaign-trail cudgel.

Gov. Sarah Huckabee Sanders of Arkansas, who campaigned this past week with former President Donald J. Trump, took a jab at Vice President Kamala Harris for not having biological children.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times

She is not humble. She has no stake in the future of the country. She and other childless women are looking down on Americans who have chosen to reproduce.

These are a few of the broadsides Republicans have lobbed against Vice President Kamala Harris, who has come under attack not for something she has done or said but for something she doesn’t have: biological children.

The latest jab came from Gov. Sarah Huckabee Sanders of Arkansas. This past week, she took the stage at a campaign event for former President Donald J. Trump and declared that her three children had given her the sort of humility that is important to maintain in national politics.

“My kids keep me humble,” she said to the crowd. “Unfortunately, Kamala Harris doesn’t have anything keeping her humble.”

Call it the motherhood divide. The presidential race has exposed a fault line in American culture — or at least among today’s most prominent politicians — over the deeply personal (and usually private) decision to have children. With an election likely to be decided by razor-thin margins, perhaps by women whose votes could tip the scale either way, motherhood itself has become a campaign-trail cudgel.

Conservatives are trying to appeal to voters who may see an existential value in motherhood. Prominent Republicans, including Senator JD Vance of Ohio, Mr. Trump’s running mate, have tied their concerns about reproduction to the declining birthrate in the United States, disparaging childless women like Ms. Harris in the process.

“This is not about criticizing people who, for various reasons, didn’t have kids,” Mr. Vance said in an interview with the commentator Megyn Kelly in July, addressing past comments he had made calling Ms. Harris and other top Democrats “childless cat ladies” without a direct stake in the country’s future. “This is about criticizing the Democratic Party for becoming anti-family and anti-child.”

Democrats report having fewer children than Republicans do. According to a 2022 survey by the University of Chicago, about 38 percent of Democrats had never had children as of that year, compared with 26 percent of Republicans. But those numbers do not back up claims that the Democratic Party is dominated by people without children or families.

A majority of American families are also considered nontraditional. More children are raised by remarried parents, single parents, cohabitating parents or no parents than by two parents in their first marriage.

Some Republican strategists do not see a winning strategy in broadsides against people who might not have children.

“When you attack anyone for their identity, you offend everyone who shares that identity,” said Whit Ayres, a longtime Republican pollster. “So if you attack people for being childless, you offend everyone who has never had children. For whatever reason.”

In the opposite corner, the left is trying to appeal to women who see motherhood as valuable — but still a choice.

Democrats have framed the decision not to have children as part of a set of choices that people should be able to make in private. And they have argued that many Americans are declining to have children because the government is not providing adequate services, like affordable child care and quality maternal health care.

In an appearance on Thursday with Oprah Winfrey, Ms. Harris pointed to the story of Amber Thurman, a 28-year-old mother from Georgia who died after not receiving prompt treatment when she experienced complications from a medication abortion.

“It’s a health care crisis that affects the patient and the profession,” Ms. Harris said, blaming abortion restrictions enacted after the fall of Roe v. Wade in 2022 — a development that Mr. Trump has celebrated.

Ms. Harris, who appeared on Thursday with Oprah Winfrey in Michigan, has not responded directly to Republican attacks about the fact that she does not have biological children.Credit...Kenny Holston/The New York Times

Ms. Harris has not directly responded to Republicans who have accused her of not caring about families because she does not have biological children of her own. Members of her blended family are doing the work for her.

“It’s appalling for somebody who is in a position of leadership, like governor, to say something so repulsive and so out of touch,” Doug Emhoff, Ms. Harris’s husband and the father of the vice president’s two stepchildren, Cole and Ella, said in an ABC News interview this past week of Ms. Sanders’s comments. “As if you need to have your own biological children to be humble. But then — then to say as if women should be humble,” he added.

Mr. Emhoff’s ex-wife, Kerstin Emhoff, also responded to Ms. Sanders on social media: “Kamala Harris has spent her entire career working for the people, ALL families,” she wrote. “That keeps you pretty humble.”

Anya Jabour, a professor of history at the University of Montana who studies gender and politics, said reproductive status had long been used to minimize women in politics.

She said that “cat lady” was an old trope: Opponents of the American suffrage movement used cats to symbolize femininity, and depicted men as stuck at home with the animals should women win the right to vote.

Dr. Jabour said that there was a “long history of a false dichotomy between feminism and maternalism,” or people whose ideas of identity revolve around motherhood.

She added that cases like Ms. Thurman’s in Georgia showed that “in fact, reproductive rights and mothers’ interests are very closely intertwined.”

Trump’s base in North Carolina still supports Mark Robinson, but some doubt he can win.

People in line to attend a Trump rally in Wilmington, N.C., on Saturday.Credit...Haiyun Jiang for The New York Times

Faithful supporters of former President Donald J. Trump lined up on Saturday afternoon to cheer him on at a rally at the Aero Center in Wilmington, N.C., their red shirts billowing from a beachside breeze.

When asked about the former president’s chances of winning North Carolina, many in the crowd were confident and brimming with energy. They would be the force to keep the battleground state red for Mr. Trump.

But many of their smiles shrank when they were asked about the embattled Republican nominee for governor, Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson, who has been under fire since CNN reported this week on the lewd comments he made on a pornography website several years ago. According to CNN, Mr. Robinson wrote on the site that he was a “black NAZI,” that he enjoyed watching transgender pornography and that slavery was not bad. He also recounted on the site how he went “peeping” on women in public gym showers as a teenager.

Few rally attendees believed the article about Mr. Robinson, who had already faced criticism for old Facebook posts that were widely condemned as racist, antisemitic and transphobic. And while many voters said they would still stand behind him, some acknowledged that the allegations were damning.

“Look, he’s toast,” said David Huffman, 60, of Wilmington, who wore a collared shirt printed with the American flag. “I’m still going to vote for Mark, but at this point it’s worse than a Hail Mary.”

Not only was Mr. Robinson not at the rally, but Mr. Trump also did not mention his name once to the thousands of supporters who were in attendance, the very people who helped fuel the rise of the lieutenant governor in 2020.

Many people at the rally said they still supported Mark Robinson in the governor’s race, but some doubted he could win. Credit...Alex Brandon/Associated Press

Those who stood firm on voting for Mr. Robinson used the same defense that he deployed this week: It was all fake, and the news media could not be trusted.

Other supporters offered Mr. Robinson some grace.

“If it’s true, we all got a past, and some of us got a past we aren’t proud of,” said Jason White, 41, of Columbus County. “People can change.”

Quintina Debose, 41, of Wilmington, said: “People do stuff all the time. They just don’t get caught.” The latest allegations, she said, were just a meaningless distraction.

But for some conservatives, the revelations were deeply concerning. Even if Mr. Trump won the state in the presidential election, they said, the chances for success for Mr. Robinson seemed less likely.

Thomas Hart, 31, of Wilmington, said he was sure about voting for Mr. Trump because his previous first choice, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., had endorsed the former president. That feeling does not extend to Mr. Robinson, though, because he has made some “pretty wild” remarks, Mr. Hart said.

Still, this was a Trump rally, and many remembered the support that the former president had shown Mr. Robinson in the past.

Bryan Faulcon, 39, of Wilmington, said he didn’t believe the allegations, but even if they were true, Mr. Robinson still had his vote. The calculation was simple, Mr. Faulcon said: policy over character.

“They can’t take him down,” he said.

At a rally in North Carolina, Trump did not mention Mark Robinson.

Through an awkward quirk of scheduling former President Donald J. Trump found himself headlining a rally in North Carolina on Saturday just two days after the man he endorsed to become the state’s next governor, Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson, was accused of making a series of disturbing posts on a pornographic website.

In the lead-up to the rally, there was a great deal of curiosity in political circles about how Mr. Trump, who had called Mr. Robinson “Martin Luther King on steroids,” might react to an explosive CNN report that Mr. Robinson had once called himself a “black NAZI” and defended slavery years ago on a pornographic forum.

The answer? He wouldn’t.

Speaking for just over an hour at a boisterous rally on an airport tarmac in Wilmington, N.C., Mr. Trump made no mention of Mr. Robinson or the scandal surrounding him, even as he gave shout-outs to a number of the state’s officials and politicians. And Mr. Robinson, who has denied the accusations, was conspicuous by his absence.

Instead, Mr. Trump delivered a fairly standard rally speech, attacking Vice President Kamala Harris and the Democrats on the economy and immigration while digressing to criticize Ms. Harris’s livestreamed event this week with Oprah Winfrey; to call her running mate, Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota, “weird”; to say that he would ask Elon Musk to help him send rockets to Mars; and to claim falsely that an Olympic boxer was transgender.

One of the only speakers at Saturday’s rally to acknowledge the controversy engulfing Mr. Robinson was Representative Dan Bishop, the Republican candidate for state attorney general, who called the revelations “a meticulously timed and coordinated character assassination.”

Building on his effort to make immigration, an area where voters are dissatisfied with Democrats, the central issue of the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump announced that he would push Congress to pass legislation outlawing so-called sanctuary cities, places that limit how local law enforcement can cooperate with federal immigration authorities. During his presidency, Mr. Trump issued an executive order that tried to withhold federal grants to such locales, an effort that was blocked by federal courts.

Mr. Trump, who has vowed to conduct an enormous deportation operation if elected, said he would deploy federal law enforcement agencies to “hunt down” and “capture” those in the country illegally.

But Mr. Trump omitted any mention of Haitian migrants in Springfield, Ohio, a group that he falsely claimed at the presidential debate this month had been eating people’s pets. On Wednesday night, Mr. Trump said he planned to visit Springfield in the “next two weeks.” Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, wrote in a guest essay in The New York Times on Friday that as a supporter of Mr. Trump and his running mate, Senator JD Vance of Ohio, he was “saddened by how they and others continue to repeat claims that lack evidence and disparage the legal migrants living in Springfield.”

Faced with polls that have showed him losing ground to Ms. Harris with female voters, Mr. Trump made a direct appeal to women, repeating claims that he had made in a lengthy all-caps social media post overnight, insisting that women were “more stressed and depressed and unhappy than they were four years ago.”

Mr. Trump has taken credit for appointing three Supreme Court justices who voted in 2022 to overturn Roe v. Wade, which eliminated the constitutional right to abortion and led to bans or abortion restrictions in 22 states. A large share of voters in swing states, particularly women, have said abortion will be central to their decision in November. But as he spoke about women at the rally, Mr. Trump said, “You will no longer be thinking about abortion, because it is now where it always had to be, with the states and with the vote of the people.”

Mr. Trump also repeated the false claim that his political opponents support the “execution of a baby after birth.” Infanticide is illegal in all 50 states.

Dante Murphy, a Baptist minister who lives in Wilmington and was standing conspicuously behind a news media section at the rally, sported a “Mark Robinson for Governor” T-shirt and a baseball cap signed by him. While he continued to support Mr. Robinson, he said, Mr. Trump’s avoidance of the topic made perfect sense.

“You know, he is playing it safe by just being quiet right now,” he said.
