Stocks Rally a Day After Fed’s Big Interest Rate Cut
The S&P 500 had already been climbing as investors grew more confident that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates by half a percentage point. Thursday’s gain put the index in range of a closing record.
The S&P 500 was on course to notch a record on Thursday after a momentous cut to interest rates from the Federal Reserve invigorated a market rally.
The index rose roughly 1.7 percent by midday, climbing past its last closing record, reached in July. The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies more sensitive to the ebb and flow of the economy rose about 1.8 percent on Thursday.
The S&P 500 has repeatedly butted up against the record in recent weeks, lifted recently as investors anticipated a big cut to interest rates. On Wednesday, the Fed met those expectations by lowering its benchmark interest rate by half of a percentage point, double the typical quarter-point adjustment the central bank typically makes.
Though stocks had wobbled in the immediate aftermath of the rate cut, closing slightly lower on Wednesday, optimism took hold in the markets overnight. It often takes the market a day or two to determine a path after a big event like the Fed meeting. Lower rates are generally good news for stock investors: lower borrowing costs boost corporate profits and increase the value of investors’ holdings.
“This can only be a good thing for equities,” said Colin Graham, head of multi asset strategies at Robeco, an asset management firm.
Investors also have to consider, however, that the Fed’s aggressive cutting could mean that policymakers are worried about the economy.
On Wednesday, Jerome H. Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, appeared to tread that tightrope carefully.
“The U.S. economy is in a good place, and our decision today is designed to keep it there,” Mr. Powell said at a news conference after the rate decision was announced.
Quincy Krosby, chief global strategist at the retail brokerage firm LPL Financial, said that “they made it clear that this is not an emergency rate cut,” which would have spooked the market.
Financial markets themselves may have been at play in the Fed’s decision to opt for a bigger half percentage cut, said Naomi Fink, a global strategist at Nikko Asset Management. Investors had placed bets on a larger cut leading up to the Fed’s meeting.
“It is possible that the Fed viewed such conditions as a good time to buy insurance,” Ms. Fink said, “while the markets were likely to absorb it well, in case conditions were not so amenable in the future.”
The question left lingering in investors’ minds is whether companies can continue to deliver the financial results to justify such lofty valuations. And that’s not the only risk. Geopolitics, the U.S. presidential election and a softening labor market could also curtail the rally over the next couple of months.
Interest Rates Fall, but Central Banks Are No Longer in Lock Step
Officials in some countries started cutting rates last year, but others, including those in Europe and the United States, have taken a more cautious approach.
Two years ago, central banks around the world were engaged in a battle against high inflation that resulted in an aggressive and synchronized jump in interest rates. Now, many policymakers are reversing course — but in a less coordinated way as price increases slow at different paces in various countries.
Central bankers in some emerging markets began cutting rates last year. European officials started a slow and cautious easing of interest rates just a few months ago. The biggest outlier had been the Federal Reserve, which had kept rates high for more than a year and throughout the summer. On Wednesday, it joined the crowd and cut rates — in a big way — for the first time since the early days of the pandemic.
“A few months ago, we were still in the space of American exceptionalism,” said Katharine Neiss, an economist at PGIM Fixed Income, an asset manager. There was the expectation that the resilience of the U.S. economy would lead to higher rates for longer, she said. “That was creating a lot of stresses and strains for the rest of the world,” she added.
If the Fed’s rate cut on Wednesday can ensure a so-called soft landing for the U.S. economy, where inflation is brought down without a severe recession, then that is “really good news for the rest of the world,” Ms. Neiss said. It also eases global financial conditions and reduces pressure on currencies that were taking a hit from the dollar’s strength.
Now, the dominant theme around the world is central banks lowering interest rates as inflation slows, falling within sight of their targets, and economic growth weakens. Still, policymakers have been cautious about moving too quickly and reigniting inflationary pressures.
The Bank of Canada has cut rates three times since June. Last week, the European Central Bank cut interest rates for the second time in three months. The Bank of England held rates steady on Thursday after cutting just once last month.
Central banks in Norway and Sweden are also expected to hold rates at their meetings later in September, emphasizing their gradual approach. Among emerging markets, the South African central bank cut rates for the first time in four years on Thursday.
Still, there are global outliers. Japan belatedly responded to rising inflation by raising rates in July. Investors suggest that the Bank of Japan is more likely to raise rates again in the near future. Nigeria has been raising rates this year as inflation has jumped and, late on Wednesday, Brazil's central bank raised rates amid concerns that faster economic growth could be inflationary.
30-Year Mortgage Rate Drops to 6.09% After Fed Rate Cut
The decline in mortgage costs, influenced by expectations of the Federal Reserve’s rate moves, could revive interest in buying, selling and remortgaging, economists said.
Mortgage rates dropped again this week, extending a monthslong decline fueled by expectations of a cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, which came into fruition on Wednesday.
The average rate on 30-year mortgages, the most popular home loan in the United States, fell to 6.09 percent this week, Freddie Mac reported on Thursday. That was down from 6.2 percent a week earlier, reaching the lowest level since February 2023. Rates have fallen about one percentage point over the past four months, and are significantly lower than their peak at nearly 7.8 percent late last year.
The downward drift in rates toward 6 percent is “reviving purchase and refinance demand for many consumers,” Sam Khater, Freddie Mac’s chief economist, said in a statement.
Here’s what else to know about the trends in mortgage rates:
The Fed’s decision on Wednesday to slash its benchmark interest rate by a higher-than-usual half percentage point was already partly reflected in mortgage rates over the past few months. Rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages tend to track the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, which can be influenced by market expectations for Fed moves.
Prospective buyers and sellers may not see a drastic drop in mortgage rates as a result of the Fed’s move this week, economists said. The Fed’s rate cut came alongside economic projections by officials that suggested a rapid pace of rate cuts in the months ahead, which could lead to even lower mortgage costs. “Declining mortgage rates over the last several weeks indicate this cut was mostly baked in, but we expect rates to fall further, sparking more housing activity,” Mr. Khater said.
Mortgage rates are still twice as high as they were three years ago, at the height of the pandemic, when the average 30-year rate was around 3 percent. Many potential sellers remain reluctant to put their homes on the market, unwilling to part with lower rates on their existing mortgages. Even with this week’s drop, there is a notable gap between current mortgage rates and those many homeowners locked during the pandemic.
Existing home sales fell 2.5 percent in August, the National Association of Realtors reported on Thursday. But there are signs that the housing market could eventually get a boost from falling mortgage rates: As rates fall toward 6 percent, more prospective sellers could list their homes, boosting inventory, according to analysts at Oxford Economics.
Some banks and mortgage lenders said they were already seeing an uptick in interest among prospective buyers, tied to the Fed’s rate cutting cycle. “This is the moment we’ve been waiting for and millions of borrowers across the country will benefit from this decision,” said Alex Elezaj, chief strategy officer at United Wholesale Mortgage. But home prices remain high, which could continue to constrain first-time buyers in particular, despite cheaper loan payments.
30-Year Mortgage Rate Drops to 6.09% After Fed Rate Cut
The decline in mortgage costs, influenced by expectations of the Federal Reserve’s rate moves, could revive interest in buying, selling and remortgaging, economists said.
Mortgage rates dropped again this week, extending a monthslong decline fueled by expectations of a cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, which came into fruition on Wednesday.
The average rate on 30-year mortgages, the most popular home loan in the United States, fell to 6.09 percent this week, Freddie Mac reported on Thursday. That was down from 6.2 percent a week earlier, reaching the lowest level since February 2023. Rates have fallen about one percentage point over the past four months, and are significantly lower than their peak at nearly 7.8 percent late last year.
The downward drift in rates toward 6 percent is “reviving purchase and refinance demand for many consumers,” Sam Khater, Freddie Mac’s chief economist, said in a statement.
Here’s what else to know about the trends in mortgage rates:
The Fed’s decision on Wednesday to slash its benchmark interest rate by a higher-than-usual half percentage point was already partly reflected in mortgage rates over the past few months. Rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages tend to track the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, which can be influenced by market expectations for Fed moves.
Prospective buyers and sellers may not see a drastic drop in mortgage rates as a result of the Fed’s move this week, economists said. The Fed’s rate cut came alongside economic projections by officials that suggested a rapid pace of rate cuts in the months ahead, which could lead to even lower mortgage costs. “Declining mortgage rates over the last several weeks indicate this cut was mostly baked in, but we expect rates to fall further, sparking more housing activity,” Mr. Khater said.
Mortgage rates are still twice as high as they were three years ago, at the height of the pandemic, when the average 30-year rate was around 3 percent. Many potential sellers remain reluctant to put their homes on the market, unwilling to part with lower rates on their existing mortgages. Even with this week’s drop, there is a notable gap between current mortgage rates and those many homeowners locked during the pandemic.
Existing home sales fell 2.5 percent in August, the National Association of Realtors reported on Thursday. But there are signs that the housing market could eventually get a boost from falling mortgage rates: As rates fall toward 6 percent, more prospective sellers could list their homes, boosting inventory, according to analysts at Oxford Economics.
Some banks and mortgage lenders said they were already seeing an uptick in interest among prospective buyers, tied to the Fed’s rate cutting cycle. “This is the moment we’ve been waiting for and millions of borrowers across the country will benefit from this decision,” said Alex Elezaj, chief strategy officer at United Wholesale Mortgage. But home prices remain high, which could continue to constrain first-time buyers in particular, despite cheaper loan payments.
The Fed’s Big Rate Cut Wasn’t Political. It Was an Economic No-Brainer.
In one sense, you could say that Wednesday’s decision by the Federal Reserve to cut rates was of minimal importance. The interest rate the Fed more or less directly controls — the federal funds rate — is the rate at which banks lend one another money overnight. And it’s hard to think of any businesses or consumers who will change their plans because the annualized interest rate on one-day borrowing has fallen a half a percentage point, from around 5.5 percent to around 5 percent — which means that if you borrow $1,000, your repayment the next day falls by 1.4 cents.
Yet it was a momentous move all the same. For one thing, Fed rate changes tend to percolate into longer-term interest rates that really do matter for the economy. For example, the series of rate hikes the Fed undertook in 2022 and 2023 drove 30-year fixed mortgage interest rates up to almost 8 percent from about 3 percent.
Even more important, by beginning to cut rates, the Fed — which began raising rates in 2022 in an attempt to control surging inflation — in effect declared its belief that the war on inflation has been won.
Why should we care what the Fed thinks? Let me tell you a secret: Jerome Powell, the Fed chair, and his colleagues don’t have any inside information about the state of the economy. (OK, they might have advance warning if, say, a major bank is about to fail.) Most of their decisions are based on the same data about unemployment, inflation and so on available to anyone with an internet connection.
It’s true that the Fed has some very smart economists on its staff. But there are plenty of smart economists outside the Fed, too. The implicit declaration that inflation has been defeated won’t come as news to anyone who has, for example, been following Mark Zandi at Moody’s or Jan Hatzius at Goldman Sachs, who have been telling us for months that inflation is under control.
Yet the Fed gains some perceived gravitas from its policy role, which means that its opinion carries special weight with investors and, perhaps more important, the general public.
So it matters that the Fed is now sounding the all-clear on inflation. But this good news raises two questions.
First, if inflation is, as Powell said in his news conference, close to the Fed’s target of 2 percent, why didn’t he and his colleagues cut rates even more?
The Fed committee that sets interest rates, which meets eight times a year, normally moves those rates gradually — a quarter point at a time. The big debate before this meeting was whether this would be a standard quarter-point cut or, what we actually got, a “jumbo” half-point cut.
But instead of thinking in terms of increments, suppose we just ask what interest-rate level makes sense at this point. Inflation appears to be under control; labor markets appear to be weakening, with unemployment still fairly low but up significantly from its low point last year and hiring falling off. Overall, as Powell said in his news conference, the labor market looks a bit cooler than it was on the eve of the pandemic.
Yet the overnight rate was 1.75 percent at the end of 2019. There are some iffy arguments to the effect that we can maintain full employment at a somewhat higher interest rate now; participants in Wednesday’s committee meeting projected on average that the interest rate will settle at 2.9 percent. But I haven’t seen any plausible case for a “neutral” rate higher than 4 percent at the most. Yet despite the jumbo cut, rates are still at 5 percent. Shouldn’t the Fed be moving more quickly to normalize rates (and minimize the risk of a recession)?
Second, will the Fed’s all-clear do anything to persuade more Americans to re-evaluate President Biden’s economic record? We did experience a temporary burst of inflation in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic, but so did almost every other major economy, while we have generally had much stronger growth than our peers have. And as White House economists have pointed out, our success in getting inflation back down has defied the expectations of commentators who insisted that disinflation would require a big rise in unemployment.
I know that some people aren’t satisfied with returning to low inflation; they want to see us get the level of consumer prices back to what it was before the pandemic. But we can’t, and even trying would be a really bad idea. Over the past century, only one president has presided over a significant decline in consumer prices; his name was Herbert Hoover.
Today’s Fed move is, of course, good for Kamala Harris. It will give consumers some direct relief on interest costs, and it will signal that high inflation is in the rear view mirror. And having Powell say, as he did in his news conference, that the economy is in “good shape” has to be helpful for a candidate who is part of the administration presiding over that economy.
And almost too predictably, Donald Trump jumped in to suggest that the Fed might be “playing politics.”
But while the Fed’s action will surely have political consequences, it wasn’t a political decision. The straight economic case for a rate cut was overwhelming; the case for a big cut was very strong. Not cutting would have been political. And the Fed didn’t let itself be bullied into inaction.
I Just Went to Darfur. Here Is What Shattered Me.
When an Arab militia rampaged through Maryam Suleiman’s village in the Darfur region of Sudan last year and lined up men and boys to massacre, the gunmen were blunt about their purpose.
“We don’t want to see any Black people,” a militia leader said, adding mockingly: “We don’t even want to see black trash bags.” To make his point, Maryam recalled, he shot a donkey because it was black.
Then the militia members executed men and boys who belonged to Black African ethnic groups, she said. “They shot my five brothers, one after the other,” Maryam told me, describing how her youngest brother survived the first bullet and called out to her. Then a militia member shot him in the head and sneeringly asked her what she thought of that.
The militia tried to systematically kill all the males over 10, Maryam said, and also killed some younger ones. A 1-day-old boy was thrown to the ground and killed, and one male infant was thrown into a pond to drown, she said.
The gunmen then rounded up the women and girls in a corral to rape, she added. “They raped many, many girls,” she recalled. One man tried to rape Maryam, she said, and when he failed he beat her. She was pregnant and suffered a miscarriage.
“You’re slaves,” Maryam quoted the militia members as saying. “There is no place for you Black people in Sudan.” So Maryam fled to neighboring Chad and is one of more than 10 million Sudanese who have been forcibly displaced since a civil war began last year in the country and ignited pogroms against Black African ethnic groups like hers.
The atrocities underway near here are an echo of the Darfur genocide of two decades ago, with the additional complication of famine. But there’s a crucial difference: At that time, world leaders, celebrities and university students vigorously protested the slaughter and joined forces to save hundreds of thousands of lives. Today, in contrast, the world is distracted and silent. So the impunity is allowing violence to go unchecked, which, in turn, is producing what may become the worst famine in half a century or more.
“It’s beyond anything we’ve ever seen,” Cindy McCain, the executive director of the United Nations World Food Program, told me. “It’s catastrophic.”
“Unless,” she added, “we can get our job done.”
World leaders will convene next week in New York for the annual United Nations General Assembly, but they have been mostly indifferent and are unlikely to get the job done. What’s needed is far greater pressure to end the civil war between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rival Arab militia, while pushing the warring parties to allow humanitarian access. All sides in the war are behaving irresponsibly, so more than half the people of Sudan — 25 million people — have become acutely malnourished already. A famine was formally declared in one area in Sudan in the summer.
Timmo Gaasbeek, a disaster expert who has modeled the crisis for a research institute in the Netherlands, told me that he foresees 13 million people starving to death in Sudan by October 2025, with a margin of error of two million. Such a toll would make this one of the worst famines in world history and the worst since the great Chinese famine of 65 years ago. By way of contrast, the famous Ukraine famine of the 1930s killed perhaps four million people, although estimates vary.
I can’t verify that a cataclysm of that level is approaching. Warring parties blocked me from entering Sudanese areas they controlled, so I reported along the Chad-Sudan border. Arriving refugees described starvation but not yet mass mortality from malnutrition.
All I can say is that whether or not a cataclysmic famine is probable, it is a significant risk. Those in danger are people like Thuraya Muhammad, a slight 17-year-old orphan who told me how her world unraveled when the Rapid Support Forces, the same group that killed Maryam’s five brothers, attacked her village and began burning homes and shooting men and boys.
“So many men were killed, like grains of sand,” she told me.
After slaughtering the men in Thuraya’s village, the militia raped many women and girls, she said. Thuraya’s cousin, a woman of 20, was among those kidnapped by the militia and hasn’t been seen since, she added.
Thuraya’s father was murdered by the militia and her mother had died earlier, so at 16 she was now the head of the household. She led her younger brother and two younger sisters to safety by walking to the Chadian border town of Adré. Gunmen tried to rob them several times, but the family had nothing left to steal.
Now in a refugee camp in Chad, Thuraya works to feed her siblings. Like other refugees, she gets a monthly food allotment from the World Food Program that helps but is insufficient. She supports her family by seeking day jobs washing clothes or cleaning houses (for about 25 cents a day). When she finds work, she and her siblings eat; if not, they may go hungry.
When I dropped by their hut, Thuraya had been unable to find work that day. A friendly neighbor had given her a cup of coffee, but she hadn’t eaten anything since the previous day — and there was no prospect of dinner, either. If there is no food, Thuraya told me, she serves water to her siblings in place of dinner.
She wept.
Thuraya wasn’t crying from her own pangs of hunger. Rather, tears tumbled silently down her cheeks out of shame at her inability to feed her brother and sisters.
“When there isn’t enough food, I give it to my sisters and brother,” she told me, and her younger sister Fatima confirmed that. “I go hungry, or else my neighbors may call me over to eat with them.”
“I’d rather my sisters and brother eat, because they cry when they go hungry,” she said. “And I can’t bear to hear them cry.”
Fatima resists the favoritism and tries to give her sister back some food. But Thuraya won’t take it and goes out, telling her brother and sisters to eat while she finds something for herself. They all know that in a refugee camp of about 200,000 hungry people, she will find nothing.
I’m hoping that Thuraya’s fortitude might inspire President Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris, along with world leaders gathering at the United Nations, to summon a similar resolve to tackle slaughter and starvation in Sudan. Donor nations have contributed less than half the sum needed by U.N. agencies to ease Sudan’s food crisis, and they have not insisted forcefully on either providing humanitarian access or on cutting off the flow of weapons that sustains the war.
Biden, who 20 years ago savaged President George W. Bush for not doing enough to stop the Darfur genocide, has provided aid and appointed a special envoy to push for peace talks but has said little about the current crisis. An American partner, the United Arab Emirates, supplies weapons to the militia that slaughtered and raped Thuraya’s neighbors, yet Biden has not publicly demanded that the Emirates cut off that support for killers and rapists.
The upshot of this neglect is the risk not only of a horrendous famine but also of endless war, Sudan’s fragmentation, enormous refugee flows and instability across the region.
So as world leaders at the U.N. General Assembly tuck into fine banquets next week to celebrate their humanitarianism, may they be awakened by thoughts of an orphan of Darfur who ignores her own hunger and divides scraps of bread among her brother and sisters.
Thuraya has no reason to feel ashamed that her siblings are hungry; the shame belongs to those who are powerful, well fed and blind.
Inflation Is Ebbing. Now the Fed Must Protect Jobs.
For the last three years, the Federal Reserve has been fighting to bring inflation down. Now it has boldly moved to protect the second half of its dual mandate: to keep employment strong.
On Wednesday, the Fed broke with precedent and cut its policy interest rate by 0.5 percentage point instead of the usual 0.25. The decision, which surprised many, is good for the economy and begins the last phase of the Fed’s policy response to the Covid pandemic. At the start of the pandemic, the Fed rapidly slashed rates effectively to zero to keep the economy afloat — only to drastically change course and raise rates just as rapidly in 2022, when inflation spiked. With this week’s decision, the Fed has brought the federal funds rate, now in a target range of 4.75 percent to 5 percent, a step toward pre-pandemic norms.
The Fed has now clearly signaled that it is starting to wind down its battle against inflation. And for good reason. Personal consumption expenditure inflation, its preferred measure, was 2.5 percent in July, and while that’s still somewhat elevated, it’s about a third of the peak in 2022. The data has shown inflation falling for much of the past two years. Even after this cut, the funds rate remains high enough to discourage some borrowing and spending, so the Fed is still fighting inflation by restraining demand.
Unlike many other central banks, however, the Fed has a mandate for maximum employment along with price stability, and the decision for a larger cut also signals that it is taking seriously recent signs of slowing in the labor market. That’s appropriate. Over the past two months, data has indicated that the labor market was not as strong as the Fed thought. Where things stand is largely fine — the unemployment rate is 4.2 percent, and monthly payroll gains are only somewhat below their strong pace before the pandemic — but the trend is worrisome. The labor market is cooling off.
The increase in the unemployment rate over the past year is in line with increases early in past recessions. While that indicator, the so-called Sahm rule (yes, I came up with it), has accurately forecast prior recessions, it and other economic rules of thumb are too simple for this complicated, post-pandemic time. The United States is not in a recession or even on the verge of one. G.D.P. is on track to grow about 3 percent for the second straight quarter.
Still, a larger rate cut now allows the Fed toreduce the risk. The level of the funds rate was too high given the progress on inflation and the cooling in the labor market. The Fed chair, Jerome Powell, referred to the cut as a “recalibration.”
A half-point cut is a big deal. Typically, when cutting rates, the Fed sticks to smaller, one-quarter-point increments unless there is intense economic or financial market strain. March 2020, when the pandemic struck, and October 2008, during a financial crisis because of the housing market collapse, were the last two half-percentage point cuts, and they fit the standard playbook. That naturally led some commentators to worry that Wednesday’s cut would signal that the economy is in crisis.
That may explain why this move raised dissent. One Fed governor, Michelle Bowman, preferred a quarter-percentage-point cut — the first dissent from a governor since 2005.
That makes sense. This was a tough call. Given the uncertainties in the economic environment, differences will arise. Waiting to build a full consensus would have slowed down the adjustment in the policy rate, and suppressing the dissenting vote would have conveyed false certainty to the public. It is good for Mr. Powell to establish that dissent is welcome, as the Fed begins what could be two years of similarly contentious decisions.
We can expect more rate cuts down the road. According to the Fed’s new forecasts, as inflation falls most Fed officials expect to be able to reduce the funds rate by at least an additional percentage point and a half before the end of 2025. But that assumes only a small increase in unemployment, and forecasts have been proved wrong repeatedly in the past four years. The large, first rate cut underscores the Fed’s willingness to pivot as it gets new information, and to not be tied to the past.
Mr. Powell was blunt when he said last month at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium that further cooling in labor market conditions was not welcome or necessary. This week, he declared that “the time to support the labor market is when it’s strong and not when we begin to see the layoffs.”
With this statement and this cut, Mr. Powell is cementing his legacy as someone who embraces both sides of the agency’s dual mandate. With solid growth, relatively low unemployment and the stock market near record highs, the Fed chose to cut from a position of strength to preserve that strength.
