answer with YTA, NTA, or NAH

AITAH? I stopped wearing/using what my husband gave me after he said that it's his money (self.AITAH)

submitted 6 hours ago * by swirledletters

I (26f) had been with my husband (30m) for five years, married three months ago. I'm a housewife andI have a little side job so I can buy what I want, my husband has a high paying job that covers the all the utilities and bills. Just a little background, after we got married, my husband insisted for me to stop working altogether since his paycheck can cover everything and help us live comfortably so I agreed.

Last Monday when I got home after I bought groceries. He asked how much was it, I told him it's $950 since he has requests and additions to the list. If not it will be only $850 just like every month.

After that, he got angry at me and told me to stop using his paycheck since it's not my money. I explained to him that I followed the list and got his request. He didn't listen and said that I'm basically throwing it all away. I was taken aback since I only use his money to pay the bills and utilities. I have a side job for my interests and I never ask him something unless I needed it.

I was so angry at his accusation that after that day I began to dig up my old stuff and used it instead and I also stopped wearing or using his gifts. He confronted me and asked why, I only said that I don't feel like throwing his money away, he looked sad and left.

When I told my friends about it, they said that what I did was petty and I should just listen, some of them said that I should be pettier. My parents are reprimanded me for taking things too far. It's been four days now and we haven't talked. I'm starting to think that I really did went too far.

Am I the asshole for rejecting his gifts?

Edit: Since people are asking about why we spend such amount on groceries every month, I would like to add that we have our weekly dinner with our friends and family, and we're usually the host. My husband likes getting those high-quality products so I can cook those 5 star like dishes for our family and friends. I hope you understand.

















































































**NAH (No Assholes Here)**

It sounds like both you and your husband are dealing with a lot of emotions and misunderstandings. Your reaction to his comment was understandable given how it made you feel, and his frustration might stem from stress or a lack of communication. It might be helpful to have an open and honest conversation about finances and expectations to clear the air and find a solution that works for both of you.

































































































Now answer from the perspective of you are the asshole (YTA) but do so politely and with respect. Write a long and detailed answer WITHOUT offending the original poster. Use facts and statistics to support your answer. 

