Opinion

Guest Essay
Kamala Harris Was ‘Confident, Principled — Presidential’: The Best and Worst Moments From Night 4 of the Democratic Convention
Aug. 23, 2024

Welcome to Opinion’s commentary for Night 4 of the Democratic National Convention. In this special feature, Times Opinion writers rate the evening on a scale of 0 to 10: 0 means the night was a disaster for Kamala Harris; 10 means it could lead to a big polling bump. Here’s what our columnists and contributors thought of the event, which included speeches by Gretchen Whitmer, Gabby Giffords and Kamala Harris.
Best Moment
Binyamin Appelbaum, member of the editorial board Kamala Harris’s great-nieces, teaching America how to pronounce her name. And Harris herself, meeting the moment with a performance that was confident, principled — presidential.
Josh Barro, author of the newsletter Very Serious Harris’s speech, especially its beginning about her upbringing and her mother. In past campaigns, Harris has sometimes seemed like an empty vessel. Now she’s reintroducing herself in a way that is specific, warm and uniquely American, and that provides a framework to explain the broadly popular values of freedom and justice she’s espousing.
Charles M. Blow, Times columnist Women ruled the night. There were so many impressive, effective women presenting — culminating with Harris, of course — that the remarkable almost became unremarkable. I had to force myself to pause and absorb the fact that I was witnessing a revolution.
Jamelle Bouie, Times columnist The first three nights of this convention were easily the most successful since 2008, but they would have been for naught had Harris missed the landing with an awkward or underwhelming acceptance speech. She succeeded. But other than a moving introduction, where she told the story of her life and family to the viewing public, this wasn’t a speech about the meaning of her candidacy. It was something closer to a State of the Union — a statement of policies and priorities and an indictment of her opponents. It was as if the campaign had offloaded talk of symbolism to other speakers so that Harris could present herself as ready to be president on Day 1.

Frank Bruni, contributing Opinion writer I wept — no, I bawled — as I listened to the teacher from Sandy Hook, the mother from Uvalde and the others who’d witnessed and lost loved ones to gun violence. That was absolutely gutting. And utterly necessary.
Jane Coaston, contributing Opinion writer They landed the dismount. Harris’s speech was well delivered and rhetorically effective, and aimed at a defined audience: the middle of the electorate.
Liam Donovan, Republican strategist Gabby Giffords was the feel-good story of the night — just a remarkable recovery and delightful return to form.
Michelle Goldberg, Times columnist Kamala Harris’s grandnieces teaching America how to pronounce her name.

Matt Labash, author of the newsletter Slack Tide God bless Adam Kinzinger for telling the truth about his (and my) party, now corrupted to its core. MAGA snowflakes get triggered by him, suggesting he’s a RINO Judas. But the actual reason they hate him is that he reminds them of something they abandoned years ago: their integrity.
Tressie McMillan Cottom, Times columnist The charming pep talk from the governor of North Carolina, Roy Cooper, was good political messaging. His prominent speaking slot just before Harris’s acceptance speech says that the Democrats are serious about winning battleground states. Korey Wise, Yusef Salaam, Raymond Santana, Kevin Richardson — four of the men once known as the Central Park Five and who now prefer the Exonerated Five — were a powerful reminder of why Donald Trump is dangerous.
Megan K. Stack, contributing Opinion writer The first five minutes or so of Harris’s acceptance speech were genuinely affecting, and a pleasure to watch. Her personal story is complex and compelling, and she has a charisma and an audience connection that we haven’t seen for quite some years in a major presidential candidate.
Worst Moment
Appelbaum D.L. Hughley’s cheap stand-up comedy set. Not the place, not the time.
Barro While Harris’s speech put a laser focus on Democrats’ most popular ideas, some earlier parts of the night’s programming did not, particularly an activist-focused section in which John Russell, an influencer from Appalachia, indulged the fantasy that Democrats’ climate policies might help them reconnect with the working class.
Blow It’s a tie, again, and they both make me sound like a stodgy old man. First, I learned a new acronym: FUBAR. Don’t google that! It’s N.S.F.W. Then the D.J. had the crowd lift their flags and sing along to Lil Jon & the East Side Boyz’s “Get Low.” Again, don’t google that!
Bouie It was significant that the vice president spoke in full support of Palestinian self-determination, but that gesture was undermined by the unwillingness of Democrats to let Palestinian Americans speak for themselves on behalf of Palestinians in Gaza.
Bruni I respect Leon Panetta and understand the significance of a former defense secretary vouching for Harris. But in the run-up to the Big Speech? His high-import, low-energy remarks should have occupied a different, earlier slot.
Coaston Whoever fueled the rumors that Beyoncé would perform probably drove higher viewership, but man, an actual Beyoncé appearance would have been cool.
Donovan No obvious blunders beyond the anticlimax after a much-hyped surprise guest never materialized, although Mark Kelly’s rather dull speech made a great retroactive case for Tim Walz.
Goldberg No Beyoncé?!!!?
Labash The actress Kerry Washington is generally adorable. But when she called on the whole arena to take a selfie with her and her “Scandal” co-star, the ordeal was yet another awful reminder that nothing in American life seems to count anymore unless our phones are involved.

McMillan Cottom The omission of a Palestinian speaker. An easy political win that should have been logistically possible.
Stack The petty refusal, after much convoluted negotiation, to grant a Palestinian speaker even a few minutes onstage discounted the many Democrats who have long called for a cease-fire. More important, with more than 40,000 dead in Gaza, this omission was callous and simply wrong.
What Else Caught Your Eye?
Appelbaum This final night, like the previous three, wasn’t really about Harris — and it’s not supposed to be. It was a group portrait of Americans and the things they want from their government. So many voices raised in hope, and in fear. And the candidate as nothing more, and nothing less, than the vehicle for those aspirations. “Kamala Harris, for the people.”

Barro Giffords continues to recover in a remarkable and inspiring way.
Blow The threat of Trump as a primary motivator has re-entered the chat. There was a parade of people victimized by Republican policies, obstruction or intransigence or victimized by Trump’s own rhetoric. Even Harris’s speech was dominated by the threat of Trump. Yes, there was dancing, but it shared space with damnation.
Bouie People are not exaggerating when they describe Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan as a presidential-level talent.
Bruni Given the superstar lineup of the final night, the remarks of Representative Maxwell Frost of Florida will probably be lost. But the youngest member of Congress — he’s 27 — exhibited incredible poise, polish and charisma. He makes Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Pete Buttigieg look like late-blooming laggards.
Coaston The convention was weighted toward the prime-time viewership hours with staid moderate voices (including Republicans). It’s an interesting choice.
Donovan A vibes speech for a vibes election, but Harris continues to exceed modest expectations and avoid the Republican-painted caricature. Nothing flashy, but a well-delivered address that touched all the bases while explicitly appealing to the political center.
Goldberg Harris didn’t talk about glass ceilings; the message at the convention was “She’s for you,” not, as it was with Hillary Clinton, “I’m with her.” But the women who packed the United Center seemed very aware of the historic nature of her candidacy, and great numbers of them wore suffragette white.
Labash Harris did very well tonight — arguably her best performance. Democrats threw a largely seamless convention. Confidence is good. But overconfidence leads to reality denial. Here’s the truth: Harris is still behind in five out of seven swing states. So Democrats shouldn’t unlace those hiking boots until they’ve actually summited Mount Comeback.

McMillan Cottom Everyone will be talking about Gov. Wes Moore after this convention. They should be. I will be talking about Alabama’s Shomari Figures, who has a dynamic political biography and displayed a stunningly confident speaking style for a young elected official. The Democratic Party is taking working-class voters seriously.
Stack Spotlighting the exonerated Central Park Five was politically deft. Harris is campaigning as a prosecutor — hardly a job universally esteemed by Democratic voters. The wrongly imprisoned men stirred memories of Trump’s crude calls for execution and allowed Harris to bask in their endorsement.

Charles M. Blow, Jamelle Bouie, Michelle Goldberg and Tressie McMillan Cottom are Times columnists.
Binyamin Appelbaum is a member of the editorial board.
Josh Barro writes the newsletter Very Serious and is the host of the podcast “Serious Trouble.”
Frank Bruni is a contributing Opinion writer.
Jane Coaston is a contributing Opinion writer.
Liam Donovan is a senior political strategist at Bracewell who previously worked for the National Republican Senatorial Committee. He is also a host of “The Lobby Shop” podcast.
Matt Labash, formerly a national correspondent at The Weekly Standard, is the author of “Fly Fishing With Darth Vader” and writes the newsletter Slack Tide.
Megan K. Stack is a contributing Opinion writer.
Source photograph by Brynn Anderson/Associated Press.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.










Really
New York10h ago

I've watch every convention, both RNC and DNC, since 1960. This year the DNC had joyous moments that brought tears to my eyes. The RNC just made me want to cry. Our country works best when we have two functioning parties. It's sad to see one go so far off the rails. Vote Blue!






Erin
VA10h ago

I wanted to high-five every woman I walked past this morning. My coffee tastes better. My heart is lighter, brighter.

It feels good to feel good.




Julie
NC10h ago

Harris had a great night! I was struck that Hillary Clinton did a lot of heavy lifting around being female that Harris did not have to do. I liked that Harris didn’t lean into being female, black or asian in her speech. In Clinton’s candidacy, I thought of Clinton as the first female president, whereas I think of Harris simply as president. And Harris is super tough!! She comes off as much more of a law and order president than any Republican. Go Kamala Harris!!






Rob
Austin, TX9h ago

Harris has to run like she is ten points down everywhere, no matter what the polls say. Keep the pressure on, don’t take your foot off Trump’s throat.






Roland Fagan
Silver Spring, MD10h ago

"Charles M. Blow, Times columnist: Women ruled the night. There were so many impressive, effective women presenting — culminating with Harris, of course — that the remarkable almost became unremarkable. I had to force myself to pause and absorb the fact that I was witnessing a revolution."

It's time for a woman to be U.S. president. It's also time to put a stop to the erosion of women's rights in America, and women being in the top leadership roles is vital to reclaiming those rights.




Michael
NEK Vermont10h ago

Leon Panetta's speech wasn't flashy; there was no attempt to rhyme; no attempt to embellish. But in content, and in his background of service to the nation and in the force of plain language, his stating the case for Kamala and against Trump, was powerful. 

His plain spoken making of the case said it all. His speech shouldn't be diminished in any way. It was powerful.




Ralph
pompton plains9h ago

When I was born, Jim Crow laws terrorized black citizens in the south.  Discrimination was rampant in the north.  In the 1950's, there were still many places in America where black people could be lynched without consequence.  While the killing of black people can still occur today, it come with consequence....mostly.

My wife & I live in Trump country.  Trump has captured the flag poles in many front lawns of Central NY.  During the Republican convention,  we felt depressed and alone.  A few Democrats  shared their despair with us in quiet tones.  

America is at the cusp of greatness like never before.  Or we can go back to an angry past.  For the first time in our history, black and white people can be friends, co workers or spouses without the baggage of our racial past.  People of different races are often seen walking urban streets together as lovers and friends.  More progress is necessary, but we have come a long way since I was born.

The America promised by Kamala Harris is the America that I want.   We must win this election.  We can't go back to the ugly past.










JCR
Atlanta, GA10h ago

This was the best convention in my lifetime. Kudos to the producers in the background that had to juggle the egos, and keep all of them oriented toward the prize: electing, Kamala Harris and Tim Walz.






Citizen
Manhattan10h ago

Gus, Tim Walz’s son, set the bar so high with his  “that’s my Dad!”.

Nothing in particular in the final night competed with Gus but the accumulated and reinforced humanity of those involved, culminating with the next President’s most presidential of presidential speeches had me thinking, knowing, “that’s my President!”.




Bri
Columbus Ohio9h ago

The DNC 2024! Goodness, did I need that? I had no idea how hopeless I had felt, for way too long. I wept like a willow numerous times (abortion, mass shooting, Gabby Gifford) I had tears of joy rolling down my face more often. I clapped my hands like a little girl. The sun is brighter today, the workload seems lighter. I feel hope. I feel joy.






Mark from Dallas
DFW9h ago

What do you have to do to get a 10? Part the Red Sea? Turn water into wine?

America was in the spotlight, and she has shone brightly. Our Party reflected that light without standing in its way. I'm proud to be an American this morning, and I think my leadership will be too...




Rick Malone
Southern AZ9h ago

Adam Kinzinger for a Harris Cabinet appointment. Not only will MAGA’s dislike it, but it will send a clear message to America that we are the United States. Not a political party.





