.NET Developer
IvoryCloud - Rockville, MD 20852

Requirements

    U.S. Citizenship. This is different than being eligible to work in the U.S. U.S. Citizenship is non-negotiable.
    Ability to pass multiple background and employment checks - federal and local.
    Bachelor’s degree in computer science or related field required.

Experience

    4-7 years of back-end development experience with Asp, .Net, SQL databases
    4-7 years of front-end development experience with Angular, HTML, CSS, JavaScript
    Azure Developer or Architect Certification preferred but not required

Responsibilities

    Work closely with the development team to support Operations & Maintenance (O&M) and New Product Development activities.
    Design and develop robust, scalable web applications using Angular, SQL, ASP.NET.
    Utilize practical experience in custom and complex enterprise workflow systems.
    Develop new enhancements, CRs, and resolve defects to improve the application.
    Stay updated with industry trends and technologies to ensure our solutions remain innovative and cutting-edge.
    Lead code reviews, provide mentorship to junior developers, and ensure best practices are followed.
    Collaborate with stakeholders to gather and refine requirements, ensuring the development team delivers high-quality solutions.

About IvoryCloud

Ivory Cloud is a purpose-driven enterprise. We go to work every day driven to achieve for our customers, learn and master new skills, and take ownership in growing those around us. Through this purpose, we do outstanding, innovative, and high-quality work.

We are building our team with a relentless focus on bettering our customers, building personal capability, and investing in the success of others. You are purpose-driven if the following describes you:

    Driven by team and personal excellence.
    Total focus on becoming a Subject Matter Expert in whatever role you have.
    Flexible thinker who solves problems with both linear and non-linear approaches.
    Excited to be a part of a growing company and committed to helping it grow.

Benefits:

We offer a competitive benefits package including, but not limited to:

    Competitive salary with performance-based bonus opportunities
    Competitive Paid Time Off
    Training and Certification opportunities eligible for expense reimbursement
    Catered lunches twice a week at the headquarters office in Rockville, MD
    Team building and social activities
    Mentor program to help you develop professionally and personally

IvoryCloud is an Equal Opportunity Employer (EEO).

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $95,000.00 - $119,000.00 per year

Benefits:

    401(k)
    401(k) matching
    Dental insurance
    Flexible schedule
    Flexible spending account
    Health insurance
    Referral program
    Vision insurance

Compensation Package:

    Bonus opportunities
    Yearly pay

Schedule:

    Monday to Friday

Application Question(s):

    Are you a U.S. Citizen? This is different than being eligible to work in the U.S. This requirement is non-negotiable.
    Do you have an active government clearance? If so, what level?
    REQUIRED: Please provide a link to your LinkedIn profile.

Experience:

    Back-end development: 4 years (Required)
    Front-end development: 4 years (Required)
    .NET: 5 years (Required)

Work Location: Hybrid remote in Rockville, MD 20852