archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
history←priornext→
	
12 May 2023 00:37:33 UTC
All snapshots	from host www.washingtonpost.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuse
Democracy Dies in Darkness
Subscribe
Sign in
This article was published more than 4 years ago
Food
Voraciously
Recipe Finder
Going Out Guide
Tom Sietsema
Tim Carman
Nourish
Dinner in Minutes
Wine
Spirits
Trump shows he’s clueless about groceries — like so many politicians before him
By Maura Judkis
August 1, 2018 at 3:23 p.m. EDT
(Andrew Harnik/AP)
Gift Article
Share
Is it any surprise that the man who lived in a gilded penthouse doesn’t know how grocery stores work? At a Florida rally on Tuesday, President Trump related voter ID laws to grocery shopping.
“If you go out and you want to buy groceries, you need a picture on a card, you need ID,” Trump said at the event at the Florida State Fairgrounds. “You go out and you want to buy anything, you need ID and you need your picture.”
Purchases of alcohol, cigarettes or cold medicine, or payments made with a check require a photo ID. Purchases of, say, Cap’n Crunch or rhubarb or frozen chicken nuggets do not. “This man has never bought a carton of milk in his life, has he?” tweeted Kaili Joy Gray of Shareblue.
Of course he hasn’t. Respectfully: Duh.
The grocery store is a minefield for politicians. In 1992, President George H.W. Bush, who had “lived the cloistered life of a top Washington bureaucrat for decades,” according to the New York Times, was described as being amazed by an electronic grocery scanner, technology that had been in use for more than a decade — though his team later clarified that he had been impressed by a particular scanner that could read torn bar codes. Still, in a recession, the characterization that he was out of touch took hold — all the way to the polls.
He’s not the only politician to fall in the grocery trap: During his 2007 presidential campaign, Rudolph W. Giuliani underestimated the cost of milk and bread by more than half. And even politicians who go into the store can be criticized for shopping at the wrong one, or buying the wrong thing. In a famous gaffe, then-candidate Barack Obama posed a question at an Iowa rally: “Anybody gone into Whole Foods lately and see what they charge for arugula? I mean, they’re charging a lot of money for this stuff.” There were no Whole Foods stores in Iowa at the time — and besides, why wasn’t he eating iceberg or romaine like a Real American, anyway?
It’s a great clueless-rich-person trope in pop culture, too. On the sitcom “30 Rock,” executive Jack Donaghy (played by Alec Baldwin), having expanded his television company’s empire to include couches, gives a rousing speech: “As we speak, our fellow countryman are rolling out our Kabletown Couches on the assembly line, earning an honest day’s pay so they can go to the store and buy milk for their family, which costs … oh, I don’t know, $90 a gallon.” In another episode, he refers to the price of a 10-pound bag of potatoes as $400, and says he gets them from the “grocery concierge.” Lucille Bluth, the cluelessly rich matriarch of “Arrested Development,” has similar grocery problems. “I mean, it’s one banana, Michael,” she says to her son. “What could it cost? $10?”
The Washington Post’s John Wagner reports that at a briefing Wednesday, White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said she was “not sure” when Trump last went to a grocery store, and added that she wasn’t sure it mattered, either. She later said that the comment was in reference to purchasing alcohol, though Trump did not mention alcohol in his remarks and has previously claimed he does not drink it, and has never smoked a cigarette. Others, like Stormy Daniels’s lawyer Michael Avenatti, were quick to criticize the remarks, and people on Twitter piled on.
The Late Show
@colbertlateshow
·
Follow
"Sir, read the sign. No license? No cake mix." - what Trump hears at the grocery store. #LSSC
Image
4:06 PM · Aug 1, 2018
1.6K
Reply
Copy link
Read 44 replies
Liddle’ Savage
@littledeekay
·
Follow
The fact that everyone at last night’s rally applauded when Trump said you need an ID to go grocery shopping shows that ALL those folks eat Miller Lite and Marlboros for breakfast.
11:51 AM · Aug 1, 2018
1.3K
Reply
Copy link
Read 95 replies
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher “used to wield a shopping basket and talk about the price of the pound and say something needed to be done about it,” British columnist Tim Montgomerie told the BBC. Documents released by the Margaret Thatcher Foundation show that the prime minister was briefed on the prices of common goods like eggs, milk and beer. And weeks after her 2016 loss to President Trump, Hillary Clinton was spotted shopping for ingredients for her Thanksgiving dinner in Chappaqua, N.Y. Former vice president Joe Biden attended the grand opening of a Costco in the District and ate a bunch of free samples. (Politicians: They’re just like us! Except when they aren’t.)
Grocery stores and certain products have come to be political signifiers on their own, too. Trump won only 22 percent of counties with a Whole Foods, wrote Michael Hendrix of the Manhattan Institute. There are “Whole Foods Republicans” and “Sam’s Club’s Republicans.” Belgian endive became a constant joke in the 1988 election, after candidate Michael Dukakis suggested struggling corn and soybean farmers try growing the less-common produce — and sales of the vegetable shot up immediately.
If knowing the price of common goods is an indicator of how in touch a politician is, perhaps a better indicator for Trump would be fast food. He is known to enjoy McDonald’s and Kentucky Fried Chicken. But if you ask him the price of a Big Mac, there’s a good chance Trump wouldn’t know the answer any better than he’d understand a grocery store: Aides were responsible for picking up his meals.
More from Food:
A customer couldn’t find any ginger in Canada Dry ginger ale, so she’s suing
World to Gordon Ramsay: You are no Anthony Bourdain
By Maura Judkis
Maura Judkis is a features reporter for The Washington Post. She is a two-time James Beard Award winner. She joined The Post in 2011.
Twitter
More From The Post

    Opinion|Donald Trump steamrolls CNN’s town hall
    May 9, 2023
    Ex-Marine to be charged in NYC subway chokehold death
    Today at 7:30 p.m. EDT
    Heather Armstrong, who made it okay to say motherhood was hard, dead at 47
    May 9, 2023
    Advice|Carolyn Hax: A few A-minuses? Parents say ‘summer school and therapy.’
    Today at 12:00 a.m. EDT
    U.S. sees record migration influx as pandemic border restrictions lift
    Today at 1:55 p.m. EDT

NewsletterThursdays
By The Way
Travel better with news, tips and guides that make you feel like a local wherever you go.
Advertisement
MOST READ Lifestyle

    1
    CNN leadership under fire after ‘disastrous’ Trump town hall
    2
    CNN’s Kaitlan Collins tried, and tried, to rebut Trump’s election lies
    3
    Florida bakery refuses to write the word ‘trans’ on a cake
    4
    Advice|Carolyn Hax: A few A-minuses? Parents say ‘summer school and therapy.’
    5
    Advice|Ask Amy: My wife gave up drinking and then stopped going out

Advertisement
TOP STORIES
Recipes
New meals to try, from easy to elaborate
I baked a new bread every week for a year. Here’s why.
Four Sisters, beloved Vietnamese restaurant, closing after 30 years
How Chinatown businesses are using farm-to-market ingenuity to survive
Try a different topic
Sign in or create a free account to save your preferences
Advertisement
MOST READ

    1
    CNN leadership under fire after ‘disastrous’ Trump town hall
    2
    18-to-20-year-olds can’t be barred from buying handguns, judge rules
    3
    Opinion|How to correctly host a town hall with Trump
    4
    George Santos confesses to theft in Brazil to avoid prosecution
    5
    Opinion|My company introduced a four-day workweek. Guess what happened?

Advertisement
Company

    About The Post
    Newsroom Policies & Standards
    Diversity and Inclusion
    Careers
    Media & Community Relations
    WP Creative Group
    Accessibility Statement 

Get The Post

    Become a Subscriber
    Gift Subscriptions
    Mobile & Apps
    Newsletters & Alerts
    Washington Post Live
    Reprints & Permissions
    Post Store
    Books & E-Books
    Newspaper in Education
    Print Archives (Subscribers Only)
    Today’s Paper
    Public Notices 

Contact Us

    Contact the Newsroom
    Contact Customer Care
    Contact the Opinions team
    Advertise
    Licensing & Syndication
    Request a Correction
    Send a News Tip
    Report a Vulnerability 

Terms of Use

    Digital Products Terms of Sale
    Print Products Terms of Sale
    Terms of Service
    Privacy Policy
    Cookie Settings
    Submissions & Discussion Policy
    RSS Terms of Service
    Ad Choices
    Your Privacy Choices California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Opt-Out Icon

washingtonpost.com © 1996-2023 The Washington Post
0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
