Trump Took a Victory Lap in Washington
Also, Ukraine is now prioritizing security, not land, in truce talks. Here’s the latest at the end of Wednesday.
Matthew Cullen
By Matthew Cullen
Nov. 13, 2024, 5:28 p.m. ET
Donald Trump returned to the Oval Office today for the first time since he grudgingly left the White House nearly four years ago. He met there with President Biden, who promised that he would make sure Trump had what he needed for a smooth transition.
“Welcome,” Biden said. “Welcome back” — an acknowledgment of his failure to prevent Trump’s return to power, which he had long said was a threat to the core of American democracy. Trump came prepared for the meeting with detailed questions for Biden, the White House press secretary said. The two met for about two hours.
Trump has named more than a dozen people to top jobs in his second-term administration, including Matt Gaetz as attorney general, Tulsi Gabbard as director of national intelligence and Pete Hegseth as defense secretary. You can see all his nominees here, and follow our live updates as Trump fills out his cabinet.
The president-elect also visited a gathering of House Republicans today near the Capitol. He received a standing ovation and joked about trying to circumvent the Constitution and run for a third term.
Later in the day, Senate Republicans selected John Thune, an establishment senator despised by some of Trump’s supporters, to be the next majority leader. He will likely be crucial in Trump’s effort to confirm his nominees for cabinet posts.
Ukraine is now prioritizing security, not land, in truce talks
For months, Ukrainian officials have said they would refuse any cease-fire deal that would cede territory to Russia. Now, in anticipation of the Trump administration’s push for an end to the war, the Ukrainians are focusing more on putting assurances in place to make a cease-fire hold.
“The territorial question is extremely important, but it’s still the second question,” a senior Ukrainian official said. “The first question is security guarantees.”
Kyiv would not formally renounce its claim over any territory, a top Ukrainian official said. But it might be willing to justify a deal in which Russia retains control over disputed land and Ukraine gains entry to NATO or secures access to a robust arsenal of weapons provided by the West.
In related news, Russia launched missile strikes today on Ukraine’s capital.
A court rejected Netanyahu’s bid to delay his testimony
Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, must take the stand next month in his corruption trial, an Israeli court ruled. Netanyahu had sought a delay, arguing that he was too busy during wartime to prepare a defense.
Netanyahu was charged in 2019 with bribery, fraud and breach of trust. His trial began in 2020, and he has always denied any wrongdoing. The cases against him center on accusations that he arranged favors for tycoons in exchange for gifts and sympathetic media coverage for himself and his family.
In related news, a C.I.A. official was arrested and charged with disclosing classified documents that appeared to show Israel’s plans to retaliate against Iran.
Inflation ticked up slightly
Consumer prices rose 2.6 percent in the year through October, according to a government report released today. The report was the latest evidence that, while inflation has cooled notably, it remains stubborn.
Since the election, consumer sentiment about the economy has shifted, depending on whom you ask. Among Republicans, consumer sentiment has soared nearly 30 percent since Election Day, while Democrats have become less optimistic.
Economists expect some of Trump’s plans, like his promise to deport millions of noncitizens, to potentially raise prices. Multiple industries, like fashion and wine, are steeling themselves for possible tariffs.
More top news
    Climate: Negotiations at the U.N. climate summit, which are focused on delivering a new plan to aid developing countries with funds, are already on a “knife edge.”
    Transportation: New York’s plan for congestion-pricing tolls is being revived at a lower price.
    NATO: Secretary of State Antony Blinken met with alliance and European officials to help plan for a future after the Biden administration.
    Hawaii: A $4 billion settlement of claims stemming from last summer’s fire in Lahaina on Maui is tangled up in court.
    Paris: Five years after a devastating fire, Notre-Dame Cathedral will reopen to the public on Dec. 7.
    China: Two days after a car rampage that killed at least 35 people, officials worked to make it seem as if nothing had happened.
    Health: New research suggests that a busy schedule might help people with A.D.H.D.
    New York: P’Nut, the pet squirrel who was confiscated from his owners by state officials and euthanized, did not have rabies.
Niche streaming services are thriving
For much of the past decade, the conventional wisdom inside the entertainment world was that only a few giant services would survive the so-called streaming wars. That assumption has been called into question over the past few years, suggesting that there may be room for more modest services, too.
Millions of viewers have signed up to watch Christmas movies on Hallmark+, horror on Shudder or British television on BritBox. Over the last two years, active subscriptions for niche streamers have outpaced the growth of their much larger competitors.
In other streaming news, “Emilia Pérez,” the genre and gender-bending winner of multiple prizes at the Cannes Film Festival, was released on Netflix today. Here’s our review.
What can we learn from venom?
Many people have heard of the weight-loss drugs Ozempic and Wegovy, which have transformed the treatment of diabetes and obesity. What is less widely known is that the drugs were created thanks in part to an experiment involving the venom of Gila monsters, the sluggish lizards native to southern Arizona and northern Mexico.
Some experts believe that venom may be nature’s “Swiss Army Knife,” and we’re just beginning to understand how venom can improve our lives.
Dinner table topics
    Missing for 50 years: After a diver found a lost ring near Barbados, he used clues on the ring to track down its owner.
    Art vs. A.I.: Artificial intelligence has become a subject for people in the arts who are worried about being replaced by it.
    Horse lessons: An enigmatic little horse named Sherlock completely changed the approach of an expert trainer.
    No gift surprises: Many recipients of presents now feel free to speak out about the items they want, and don’t want, in their lives.