archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
no other snapshots from this url
	
19 Nov 2024 00:09:26 UTC
All snapshots	from host www.nytimes.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuse
Skip to content
Skip to site index
00:00

00:00
 Video Data Failed to Load
0:00
Opinion Op-Docs
What a School Performance Shows
Us About Japanese Education
A look into the delicate balance between teamwork, discipline
and personal growth.
By Ema Ryan Yamazaki

By Ema Ryan Yamazaki
Ms. Yamazaki is a documentary filmmaker.
Nov. 18, 2024, 7:00 p.m. ET
What makes Japanese people “Japanese”? For me, the key lies in what we are taught during our elementary school years.
Children as young as six are given the responsibility to clean their own classrooms and serve one another lunch. Schools are structured like mini societies, where everyone has a role and is expected to contribute to the community. There’s a strong focus on nonacademic education intended to teach teamwork, work ethic and a sense of accomplishment.
Growing up in Japan as the child of a Japanese mother and a British father, I struggled with my identity. It was only years later when I was living abroad that I came to appreciate the values and work ethic instilled in me by my elementary school education; they are so normalized in Japan that their worth is underappreciated. These traits also contribute to why Japanese society works the way it does: Our trains run on time because we are taught to prioritize harmony and consideration for others; on the other hand, we live under a collective pressure to conform and not bring shame upon our community.
In the short documentary above, “Instruments of a Beating Heart,” filmed in 2022, first graders at a Tokyo public school are presented with a challenge for their final semester: to form an orchestra and perform at a school ceremony. As the children are taught to “make your hearts as one” and rigorously rehearse, we see both the pressures and the wonders of being held responsible to a group. The character-building traditions in Japanese education are experienced through Ayame, who, in the face of newfound challenges, learns to be resilient. I believe the experience of overcoming obstacles, as Ayame does, is crucial to education. But where should the balance lie between discipline and freedom?
What is happening in our schools will shape what our future society will look like. While the Japanese system has its strengths and weaknesses, I hope this film provides the opportunity for other societies around the world to hold a mirror to their educational systems and to reflect on how they want to raise the next generation.
More on growing up in Japan
The Book Bag That Binds Japanese Society
July 15, 2024
Documentary Filmmaker Explores Japan’s Rigorous Education Rituals
April 5, 2024
Opinion | Shina Peng and Ema Ryan Yamazaki
There’s Not Just One Way to Be Japanese
Dec. 24, 2023
Ema Ryan Yamazaki is a Japanese British director and editor based in Tokyo.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Op-Docs is a forum for short, opinionated documentaries by independent filmmakers. Learn more about Op-Docs and how to submit to the series.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, X and Threads.

Related Content
Op-Docs
The Oscar-winning series of short documentaries by independent filmmakers.

    Instruments of a Beating Heart
    más y más y más flores

More in Opinion

    Donald Trump Is Already Starting to Fail
    Opinion
    Joe Raedle/Getty Images
    I’m 16. On Nov. 6 the Girls Cried, and the Boys Played Minecraft.
    Opinion
    Xinyue Chen
    When Will Democrats Learn to Say No?
    Opinion
    Nadine Redlich
    Enough
    Opinion
    Damon Winter/The New York Times

Editors’ Picks

    ‘S.N.L.’ Cast Makes Its Case to Stay off Trump’s Enemies List
    James Austin Johnson, center (with, from left, Bowen Yang, Ego Nwodim, Heidi Gardner and Marcello Hernández), appeared as “hot, jacked Trump” in the “S.N.L.” opening sketch this week.
    NBC Universal, via YouTube
    Airlines Hate ‘Skiplagging.’ Meet the Man Who Helps Travelers Pull It Off.
    Skiplagging offers significant value to cost-conscious travelers, Aktarer Zaman says, and he’s invigorated to empower them with his website.
    Aktarer Zaman

Trending in The Times

    Pennsylvania’s Top Court Tells Counties to Stop Defying Its Ballot Order
    ‘Leonardo da Vinci’ Is a Humanizing Look Into a Great Mind
    How Healthy Are Sweet Potatoes?
    Burglars Broke Into Windsor Castle Estate, Home of Prince William, Kate and Family
    Vladimir Shklyarov, Star Russian Ballet Dancer, Dies at 39
    Returns Are a Headache. More Retailers Are Saying, Just ‘Keep It.’
    SpaceX Starship’s Sonic Boom Creates Risk of Structural Damage, Test Finds
    Shouting Racial Slurs, Neo-Nazi Marchers Shock Ohio’s Capital
    6 New Movies Our Critics Are Talking About This Week
    A Mummified Saber-Toothed Kitten Emerges in Siberia

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
News
Arts
Lifestyle
Opinion
More
Site Information Navigation

    © 2024 The New York Times Company

    NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions

    Your Privacy Choices

0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
