What a School Performance Shows Us About Japanese Education
A look into the delicate balance between teamwork, discipline and personal growth.
By Ema Ryan Yamazaki
Ms. Yamazaki is a documentary filmmaker.
What makes Japanese people “Japanese”? For me, the key lies in what we are taught
during our elementary school years. Children as young as six are given the
responsibility to clean their own classrooms and serve one another lunch. Schools
are structured like mini societies, where everyone has a role and is expected to
contribute to the community. There’s a strong focus on nonacademic education
intended to teach teamwork, work ethic and a sense of accomplishment. Growing up
in Japan as the child of a Japanese mother and a British father, I struggled with
my identity. It was only years later when I was living abroad that I came to
appreciate the values and work ethic instilled in me by my elementary school
education; they are so normalized in Japan that their worth is underappreciated.
These traits also contribute to why Japanese society works the way it does: Our
trains run on time because we are taught to prioritize harmony and consideration
for others; on the other hand, we live under a collective pressure to conform and
not bring shame upon our community. In the short documentary above, “Instruments
of a Beating Heart,” filmed in 2022, first graders at a Tokyo public school are
presented with a challenge for their final semester: to form an orchestra and
perform at a school ceremony. As the children are taught to “make your hearts as
one” and rigorously rehearse, we see both the pressures and the wonders of being
held responsible to a group. The character-building traditions in Japanese
education are experienced through Ayame, who, in the face of newfound challenges,
learns to be resilient. I believe the experience of overcoming obstacles, as Ayame
does, is crucial to education. But where should the balance lie between discipline
and freedom? What is happening in our schools will shape what our future society
will look like. While the Japanese system has its strengths and weaknesses, I hope
this film provides the opportunity for other societies around the world to hold a
mirror to their educational systems and to reflect on how they want to raise the
next generation. Ema Ryan Yamazaki is a Japanese British director and editor based
in Tokyo.