
archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
history←priornext→
	
6 Oct 2024 20:48:39 UTC
Redirected from	
no other snapshots from this url
All snapshots	from host briefs.acemlna.com
from host www.bloomberg.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuseBuy me a coffee
Skip to content
The Company & its ProductsBloomberg Terminal Demo RequestBloomberg Anywhere LoginCustomer Support

Subscribe
Apple:
iPhone 16
Global Power Play
Mac Mini Update
Tabletop Robot
Potential CEO Successors
Technology
Apple Readies New iPhone SE Model That Kills the Home Button

    New SE will use modernized design to entice budget shoppers
    Company also preparing iPad mini for this year, Air for 2025

The iPhone 14, which the next iPhone SE is based on.Photographer: Jeenah Moon/Bloomberg
By Mark Gurman
October 1, 2024 at 7:26 PM UTC
Apple Inc., fresh off the release of the iPhone 16, is preparing to announce a new low-end phone early next year alongside upgraded iPads.
The company is nearing production of an updated iPhone SE — codenamed V59 — that will become its new entry-level model, according to people with knowledge of the matter. Apple is also aiming to manufacture new iPad Air models and keyboards for release around the same time, said the people, who asked not to be identified because the plans aren’t public.
The release will mark the first update to the iPhone SE since 2022, when Apple added 5G capability to the device. With the latest model, Apple will move away from the old home button design and transition to an edge-to-edge screen.
WATCH: Bloomberg’s Mark Gurman has the details on Apple’s plans for a new iPhone SE.
The SE overhaul will help Apple compete in the low-end smartphone market, where it faces tough competition from Android devices — especially in China. The current model costs $429, which is hundreds less than the standard iPhone but more expensive than many of its rivals. Modernizing the SE so it looks more like its higher-end siblings should help entice budget-minded shoppers and potentially win back market share lost to brands such as Huawei and Xiaomi.
Read More: Apple’s New iPhone 16 Reflects a Slowing Pace of Innovation
The new SE phone is expected to support Apple Intelligence, an upcoming suite of AI tools that will also work with the iPhone 16 and the high-end versions of last year’s iPhone 15. The new model will resemble the iPhone 14, including the notch cutout at the top. The current SE more closely resembles the iPhone 8, the last standard version to include a home button.
A spokesperson for Cupertino, California-based Apple declined to comment.
The new iPad Air models — codenamed J607 and J637 — will focus on internal improvements. Apple also is preparing an updated version of its Magic Keyboard accessory, codenamed R307 and R308, for both the 11-inch and 13-inch versions of the new Air. These will bring some of the features of the iPad Pro keyboard down-market.
Earlier this year, Apple updated the Air lineup with an M2 chip and added the 13-inch screen option. A new iPad mini — codenamed J410 — is coming too, potentially by the end of 2024.
The M2 iPad Air.Photographer: Samsul Said/Bloomberg
A revamped version of the iPad Pro was released at the same time as this year’s iPad Air, but that higher-end device includes an M4 processor that has yet to come to other models. That means an update is less urgent given the chip is already a generation ahead.
Beyond the new iPhone SE and iPads, Apple is also refreshing its Mac computer lineup. Updated models this year will include a revamped Mac mini as well as updated MacBook Pros and iMacs. They’ll sport the M4 processor and highlight Apple Intelligence features. The M4 chip will come to the MacBook Air, Mac Studio and Mac Pro during 2025.

Follow all new stories by Mark Gurman
In this Article
Apple Inc
226.80
+0.50%
Follow
Xiaomi Corp
24.55
+2.08%
Follow
Have a confidential tip for our reporters? Get in Touch
Before it’s here, it’s on the Bloomberg Terminal
More From Bloomberg
TOPSHOT-US-WEATHER-HURRICANE-HELENE
House Speaker Says Congress Can Wait for Helene Damage Needs
updated 45 minutes ago
Trump Goes Back To Butler Assassination Site To Bolster Campaign
Trump Rallies With Elon Musk at Site of Assassination Attempt
North Dublin fire
Ireland’s Anti-Migrant Rage Lands on a Hedge Fund Trader’s Doorstep
Andreessen Horowitz Co-Founder Ben Horowitz Interview
Ben Horowitz Will Donate to Harris Campaign After Trump Support
Top Reads
milton-path-20241006-18Z
Tracking Hurricane Milton’s Latest Path
by Cedric Sam and Armand Emamdjomeh
From Cleveland to Chicago, NFL Teams Dream of Domed Stadiums
by Vince Guerrieri
TOPSHOT-LEBANON-ISRAEL-PALESTINIAN-CONFLICT
Widening Mideast Conflict Exposes Limits of US Leverage With Israel
by Peter Martin, Fiona MacDonald, Dan Williams and Iain Marlow
Big Take Eisler
Goldman Sachs Prodigy Finds It Hard to Crack the Hedge Fund Elite
by Nishant Kumar, William Shaw, Sridhar Natarajan and Donal Griffin
Home
BTV+
Market Data
Opinion
Audio
Originals
Magazine
Events
News
Markets
Economics
Technology
Politics
Green
Crypto
AI
Work & Life
Wealth
Pursuits
Businessweek
CityLab
Equality
Pursuits
Work Shift
Market Data
Stocks
Commodities
Rates & Bonds
Currencies
Futures
Sectors
Economic Calendar
Explore
Newsletters
Explainers
The Big Take
Graphics
Submit a Tip
About Us
Terms of Service
TrademarksPrivacy Policy
CareersMade in NYCAdvertise
Ad Choices
Help©2024 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.
0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
