Software Development Engineer II, Alexa Subscriptions Growth + Alexa Communications
Job ID: 2783240
Applied: Sep 24, 2024
USA, WA, Seattle

Description
We have 2 teams that are hiring for a SDE II currently.

1. Alexa Subscriptions Growth Team

We have an exciting charter as we work towards how customers discover, purchase, and use digital subscriptions and skills across hundreds of 1P/2P/3P domains that will be support through the LLM/ Generative AI capabilities that we are building within Alexa. This involves building experiences that span across Mobile App, Retail, and variety of touchpoints on Echo Devices/ Fire TV, involves having a deep understanding of distributed systems and designing performant services that are able to handle 1000s of TPS of actual Alexa customer traffic. If you are passionate about working on projects that involve Generative AI and ML, we have those too on our immediate roadmap!

What's in it for you? We are extremely agile and are in the process of revolutionizing how Alexa interacts with customers as we make her the best AI assistant ever! You would want to join us now if you feel passionate about being part of this journey. This is a multi-disciplinary role where you will be working closely with several Sr. SDEs, PEs, PMs, and Scientists on a regular basis and will be responsible for designing and delivering critical services for Alexa. While we are always busy making history, we never forget to have fun. Talk about summer picnics, bowling events, attending trainings and seminars to help with your growth!

2. Alexa Communications Team

It’s still Day One for the Alexa Communications team – we have a lot to innovate and build to make communication through Alexa devices a magical experience. And now you can send a message, make a call, play announcements, or drop in on your closest friends & family via Alexa devices or the Alexa app! The Alexa communications team is working to become the most natural way for people to communicate, and the challenge ahead is significant. We're a high energy, fast growth business excited to have the opportunity to define the future of voice-controlled communications, make Alexa even more useful, and delight customers around the world.

This position is within Alexa Communications team which develops core software components for communication experiences across various platforms. In this role, you will have the opportunity to work with domain experts and software engineers, and deliver key Alexa Communications features and use cases.



Basic Qualifications
- 3+ years of non-internship professional software development experience
- 2+ years of non-internship design or architecture (design patterns, reliability and scaling) of new and existing systems experience
- Experience programming with at least one software programming language

Preferred Qualifications
- 3+ years of full software development life cycle, including coding standards, code reviews, source control management, build processes, testing, and operations experience
- Bachelor's degree in computer science or equivalent

Amazon is committed to a diverse and inclusive workplace. Amazon is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate on the basis of race, national origin, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, protected veteran status, disability, age, or other legally protected status. For individuals with disabilities who would like to request an accommodation, please visit https://www.amazon.jobs/en/disability/us.

Our compensation reflects the cost of labor across several US geographic markets. The base pay for this position ranges from $129,300/year in our lowest geographic market up to $223,600/year in our highest geographic market. Pay is based on a number of factors including market location and may vary depending on job-related knowledge, skills, and experience. Amazon is a total compensation company. Dependent on the position offered, equity, sign-on payments, and other forms of compensation may be provided as part of a total compensation package, in addition to a full range of medical, financial, and/or other benefits. For more information, please visit https://www.aboutamazon.com/workplace/employee-benefits. This position will remain posted until filled. Applicants should apply via our internal or external career site.
