What to Know About Congestion Pricing
Gov. Kathy Hochul is fast-tracking new tolls to enter Midtown and Lower Manhattan. Drivers could be charged beginning in January.
By Winnie Hu and Ana Ley
Nov. 14, 2024, 6:34 p.m. ET
New York is once again moving to adopt the nation’s first-of-its-kind congestion pricing program to ease traffic and raise money for mass transit. That means drivers may have to pay to enter the most congested parts of Manhattan as soon as early January.
Gov. Kathy Hochul, a Democrat, announced on Thursday that she was reviving the tolling plan, which she abruptly paused in June over concerns that it could slow the city’s post-pandemic recovery. But now, five months later, Ms. Hochul is ready to unpause the program.
Ms. Hochul and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the city’s subway and buses and two commuter rail lines, are racing against the clock to push the plan through before a powerful critic, President-elect Donald J. Trump, takes office. Mr. Trump has vowed to kill the program in his first week in office.
The revised plan would offer a significant break to drivers: a 40 percent toll reduction across the board for all types of vehicles as well as for travel during off-peak hours. The peak toll for most passenger cars will now be $9, instead of $15.
The tolling revenue would still be used to raise $15 billion for the M.T.A. to make critical repairs and upgrades to New York City’s transit network.
When would the tolling begin?
The revised congestion pricing plan will be fast-tracked, and will be presented to the M.T.A. board for approval next week.
The program is expected to be running by early January, with a possible start date around Jan. 5. The state has already spent more than half a billion dollars to get the program going, much of it for cameras and tolling software that are ready to go.
The Federal Highway Administration, which is part of the Department of Transportation, must also sign off on the program, as well as the state and city transportation departments. Ms. Hochul has said that the state is working closely with the Biden administration.
How would it work?
Most drivers would have to pay a fee to enter a designated congestion zone, which would run from 60th Street to the Battery. That area includes some of the city’s most famous destinations and neighborhoods, like the theater district, Times Square, Hell’s Kitchen, Chelsea and SoHo.
The tolls would vary by time of day, with the highest tolls during the peak period from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m. on weekdays, and from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. on weekends. Outside those hours, the tolls would be 75 percent cheaper, to encourage more travel when the traffic is lighter.
Through traffic on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and on the West Side Highway along the borough’s edges would not be charged congestion fees as long as the driver stayed on the highways.
The tolls would be collected mainly through the E-ZPass system, which many drivers already use to pay tolls on bridges, tunnels and highways. Electronic detection points have been placed at entrances to and exits from the tolling zone.
Drivers without an E-ZPass reader would be charged at a higher rate. They would be identified through cameras that would take photos of their license plates and would receive bills in the mail.
What are the revised tolls?
Most passenger cars would now be charged $9 once a day to enter the congestion zone at peak hours, and $2.25 at other times.
Those riding motorcycles would pay $4.50 at peak times, and $1.05 off-peak, because they are smaller and contribute less to congestion.
Smaller commercial trucks and some buses would pay a toll of $14.40 at peak hours and $3.60 at other times. Larger trucks and tour buses would pay $21.60 at peak hours, and $5.40 off-peak.
Passengers riding in taxis and other for-hire vehicles, including Ubers, would have a per-ride surcharge added to their fares at all times in the congestion zone. The surcharge would be 75 cents for a taxi, green cab or black car, and $1.50 for an Uber or Lyft, for each trip to, from, within or through the congestion zone.
Who would receive exemptions, credits and discounts?
There are limited exemptions from the tolls, in an effort to evenly spread out the burden of the tolls and raise enough money for the M.T.A. Drivers of certain vehicles carrying people with disabilities and authorized emergency vehicles would not be charged.
Some residents inside the congestion zone may be eligible for a state tax credit equal to the amount of their tolls.
Low-income drivers would be able to register for a 50 percent discount on all trips into the tolling zone after the first 10 trips in a month.
During peak hours, drivers who enter Manhattan via four tunnels that already require tolls — the Lincoln, Holland, Hugh L. Carey and Queens-Midtown — would receive a proposed credit of up to $3 against the daily congestion charge.
What could stop it?
Before Ms. Hochul paused congestion pricing, a growing number of opponents — including Gov. Philip D. Murphy, a Democrat, of New Jersey, influential unions and some New York elected officials — had mobilized to block the program.
At least nine lawsuits have been filed against congestion pricing by opponents, including by Mr. Murphy and the Trucking Association of New York. Those lawsuits are still pending and some of these opponents are continuing to fight.
This week, five House Republicans representing parts of New York City and its suburbs also wrote to Mr. Trump calling on him to block the program.
“We request your commitment to ending this absurd congestion-pricing cash grab once and for all,” wrote the lawmakers, Representatives Nicole Malliotakis, Mike Lawler, Andrew Garbarino, Nick LaLota and Anthony D’Esposito.
If the plan is not in place by the time he takes office, Mr. Trump could direct federal transportation officials to withhold their approval. And even if it is already running, he could still try to retract federal approval or threaten to withhold federal funding for New York City, legal and transportation experts said, though either measure is likely to end up in a court battle.
Winnie Hu is a Times reporter covering the people and neighborhoods of New York City. More about Winnie Hu
Ana Ley is a Times reporter covering New York City’s mass transit system and the millions of passengers who use it. More about Ana Ley
See more on: 2024 Elections: News, Polls and Analysis, N.Y. Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Transportation Department, Kathy Hochul, Donald Trump, Phil Murphy


Hochul Brings Back Congestion Pricing Plan After Months of Suspense
The governor is renewing plans to start the tolling program, but at discounted rates. Ms. Hochul said it will generate $15 billion for mass transit.
Winnie Hu
By Ana Ley and Winnie Hu
Nov. 14, 2024
Gov. Kathy Hochul on Thursday announced the resurrection of New York City’s congestion pricing program, drawing a rebuke from the incoming president and setting up renewed legal battles to stop new tolls from taking effect in the heart of Manhattan.
Ms. Hochul, who had canceled the tolling plan abruptly this summer just weeks before it was scheduled to begin, said that she would salvage it by reducing rates as she sought to appease critics who said the fees were too high.
But the plan, which would be the first of its kind in the nation, could still be derailed. President-elect Donald J. Trump has threatened to kill congestion pricing as one of his first acts in office. And other opponents, among them the State of New Jersey and an influential union, said they were resuming litigation to halt the plan for good.
The retooled congestion pricing plan would charge most motorists $9 to enter Manhattan below 60th Street during peak hours, down from the previously approved rate of $15. The new program was scheduled to begin by early January, with a possible start date around Jan. 5.
At a news conference on Thursday, the governor reiterated her argument that she had halted the original version of congestion pricing because the tolls would be a financial burden on New Yorkers.
“I always have and I always will fight to put more money in the pockets of everyday New Yorkers,” Ms. Hochul said. “That’s why, back in June, I stood up on behalf of hardworking families.”
Congestion pricing aims to get cars off the crowded streets of Manhattan and improve air quality while also raising funds for the city’s mass transit. But commuter groups from across the New York metropolitan area have complained that the tolls would amount to a shadow tax.
The reduced tolls would save commuters nearly $1,500 annually, Ms. Hochul said, while also meeting the budget needs of the M.T.A. The $9 toll was expected to stay in place for at least three years, officials said, before possibly being raised. The revised plan is expected to go before the board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority next week for approval.
“We never lost faith that it was the right policy and eventually its time would come,” said Patrick McClellan, the policy director at the New York League of Conservation Voters, an environmental group. “Right now, the most important thing is getting the program up and running.”
But questions remain about how the lower fee will be sufficient to achieve one of the program’s primary goals: helping raise $15 billion for the M.T.A. to pay for critical repairs and upgrades to New York’s public transit system.
Transit leaders in New York City had to scrap a broad range of improvements to the nation’s largest subway and bus networks after Ms. Hochul paused congestion pricing. The staff of the M.T.A. detailed cuts that totaled $16.5 billion, about a third of the agency’s capital plan.
Revenue from the tolls was projected to be about $1 billion annually, which in turn would allow the M.T.A. to secure $15 billion in financing through bonds.
On Thursday, transit officials said the revised plan would still allow the M.T.A. to hit its financing target even if the annual receipts from tolls would initially be less than $1 billion.
“We’re required to give the M.T.A., basically, a $15 billion credit card,” said Kathryn Garcia, who oversees the operations of state agencies. “Then they’ll start paying that off. And they will have the cash flow as we move forward to do that. It just may mean that it takes longer to pay it all back.”
But some watchdog groups were unconvinced by the presentation given by Ms. Hochul, transit leaders and other state officials. Andrew Rein, president of the Citizens Budget Commission, a watchdog group, said not enough details had been released for him to be fully confident about the plan.
“We urge the administration to share more details of the plan,” Mr. Rein said in a statement, “so the public and policymakers can rest assured that the $9 congestion charge fully plugs the $15 billion funding gap without slowing projects or using financing methods that stress the M.T.A.’s budget.”
On Thursday, Ms. Hochul announced a 40 percent reduction across the board to the previously approved tolling structure. That means that along with the lower $9 toll during peak hours, cars would pay an off-peak rate of $2.25 while other types of vehicles would receive similar discounts.
The lower toll would bring in an estimated $500 million a year, down from the previous $1 billion projection, senior M.T.A. officials said Thursday. The original plan was also expected to reduce the number of vehicles in the congestion zone by roughly 17 percent, and although it was unclear how the scaled-back program would compare, Ms. Garcia said that it would cut traffic by at least 10 percent.
“We think $9 is a good place to start,” said Kate Slevin, executive vice president of the Regional Plan Association, an urban planning nonprofit. “It’s going to deliver better transit, cleaner air and a reduction in traffic, and those are the key goals of the congestion pricing program.”
Ms. Hochul had given few public hints that she was concerned about the cost of the tolls when she suspended the program before its long-awaited debut. Officials at the M.T.A. had already spent more than half a billion dollars and installed much of the equipment needed to put the program in place when it was halted.
The governor said on Thursday that the timing of the new plan was not motivated by Mr. Trump’s return to Washington next year.
“I’m not driven by the calendar of when people are elected or not elected,” she said during the news conference.
Mr. Trump on Thursday said that he disagreed with Ms. Hochul’s decision. He repeated his concern that congestion pricing would harm New York City’s economy and its rebound from the Covid pandemic by driving visitors and businesses away.
“It will put New York City at a disadvantage over competing cities and states, and businesses will flee,” he said through a spokesman. “It will be virtually impossible for New York City to come back as long as the congestion tax is in effect.”
New York officials would still need final federal approval for the program to get underway. A spokesman for the U.S. Department of Transportation said on Thursday that New York officials had notified the department of the updated plan. The Federal Highway Administration, an agency within that department, “is working expeditiously to finalize the needed steps to complete the agreement,” he added.
If the program does not receive that approval before Mr. Trump is inaugurated, he could block it permanently. Even if it is already in place, Mr. Trump could find other ways to impede the program, such as by withholding federal funding to New York City.
Supporters of the plan, some of whom have fought for decades to institute congestion pricing, applauded Ms. Hochul’s decision and urged her to move quickly to get the program up and running before Inauguration Day.
“Subway and bus riders campaigned for years to win congestion pricing, and the governor’s new plan represents much more than just half a loaf,” said Danny Pearlstein, a spokesman for Riders Alliance. “It’s a new balance between traffic and transit.”
Even if the program overcomes its political hurdles, it could still be undone through court action. At least nine lawsuits over congestion pricing have been filed by opponents in recent years.
As Ms. Hochul moved to bring back the program, New Jersey officials who are suing New York to stop it petitioned a federal judge for a decision in their case. Opponents there worry that traffic and pollution could be shifted across the Hudson River as drivers avoid the new tolls.
“Merely lowering the toll amount would not cure the defects in the National Environmental Policy Act review process conducted by the defendants,” wrote Randy M. Mastro, the lawyer representing New Jersey.
A group of residents called New Yorkers Against Congestion Pricing Tax who have filed a separate lawsuit said this week that they were considering seeking an injunction to block the program. Representatives for the United Federation of Teachers and the Trucking Association of New York, which have filed separate lawsuits against the program, said on Thursday that they would continue to fight it.
In a statement on Thursday, Gov. Phil Murphy of New Jersey reiterated his objections. “All of us need to listen to the message that voters across America sent last Tuesday, which is that the vast majority of Americans are experiencing severe economic strains and still feeling the effects of inflation,” he said. “There could not be a worse time to impose a new $9 toll.”
Emma Fitzsimmons, Grace Ashford and Maggie Haberman contributed reporting.
Ana Ley is a Times reporter covering New York City’s mass transit system and the millions of passengers who use it. More about Ana Ley
Winnie Hu is a Times reporter covering the people and neighborhoods of New York City. More about Winnie Hu
A version of this article appears in print on Nov. 15, 2024, Section A, Page 19 of the New York edition with the headline: Hochul Brings Back Congestion Tolling Program at Reduced Rates. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe