Opinion

Guest Essay
Trump Can Win on Character
Aug. 26, 2024

By Rich Lowry

Mr. Lowry is the editor in chief of National Review.

With the defenestration of Joe Biden and the ascent of Kamala Harris, conventional wisdom has gone from asking, “How can Donald Trump lose?” to, “How can he win?”
It’s basically a tossup race, but a successful Harris rollout and convention, coupled with a stumbling Trump performance since Mr. Biden’s exit, have created a sense of irresistible Harris momentum.
As usual when he falters, Mr. Trump is getting a lot of advice from his own side.
For as long as Mr. Trump has been in the ascendancy in the G.O.P., he will go off on some pointless tangent and Republicans will urge him — perhaps as they hustle down a corridor of the U.S. Capitol — to talk about the economy instead of his controversy du jour.
A close cousin of this perpetual advice is the admonition that Mr. Trump should concentrate more on the issues in this campaign. Neither recommendation is wrong, but they are insufficient to making the case against Kamala Harris.
Presidential races are won and lost on character as much as the issues, and often the issues are proxies for character. Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life, but the attributes that play into the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency — is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans?
Presidential races, in this sense, are deeply personal; they usually involve disqualifying the opposing candidate, rather than convincing voters that his or her platform is wrongheaded.
The Obama team hammered Mitt Romney on the issues in 2012, but pretty much every policy argument went back to the core contention that he was a heartless, out-of-touch capitalist who valued the bottom line more than people. That ended up being the winning argument of the campaign.
By the same token, Mr. Trump isn’t going to beat Ms. Harris by scoring points in the debate over price controls or the border.
Everything has to be connected to the deeper case that Ms. Harris is weak, a phony, and doesn’t truly care about the country or the middle class. The scattershot Trump attacks on Harris need to be refocused on these character attributes.
To wit: Ms. Harris was too weak to win the Democratic primary contest this year. She was too weak to keep from telling the left practically everything it wanted to hear when she ran in 2019. She is too weak to hold open town-hall events or do extensive — or, at the moment, any — sit-down media interviews.
She has jettisoned myriad positions since 2019 and 2020 without explanation because she is a shape-shifting opportunist who can and will change on almost anything when politically convenient. Even if what she’s saying is moderate or popular, she can’t be trusted to hold to it once she’s in office.
She didn’t do more as Vice President to secure the border or to address inflation because she didn’t care enough about the consequences for ordinary people. She doesn’t care if her tax policies will destroy jobs. She has been part of an administration that has seen real wages stagnate while minimizing the problem because the party line matters to her more than economic reality for working Americans.
You get the point. There is plenty for the Trump campaign to work with along these lines.
In 2004, the George W. Bush re-election operation basically took one equivocation from John Kerry, his infamous line about an Iraq funding bill — “I actually did vote for the $87 billion, before I voted against it” — and ran Bush’s entire campaign based on it.
Mr. Kerry’s vote itself wasn’t so important as what the Bush campaign convinced people it said about Mr. Kerry’s character. As the Times described it at the time, “Kerry aides dismiss the sentence as the inevitable verbal hiccup that comes when candidates engage voters in informal settings and complain that the Bush campaign has ripped out of context a perfectly reasonable explanation of the back-and-forth reality of Congress. But Mr. Bush’s team contends it is emblematic of the larger case they are making against Mr. Kerry: that he is a flip-flopping Washington insider unqualified to lead the nation in wartime.”
Surely, the Harris team has kept her under such tight wraps because it wants to avoid a similar “inevitable verbal hiccup” while engaging with people “in informal settings.”
Of course, Mr. Trump doesn’t need much convincing to launch personal attacks. He said earlier this month that he feels “entitled” to them. But calling Ms. Harris dumb or questioning her racial identity does more to undermine him than her. The point isn’t to be gratuitously insulting, but to make a root-and-branch argument that she shouldn’t be — can’t be — president.
Mr. Trump isn’t ever going to become a buttoned-up campaigner who sticks closely to script. There will inevitably be lots of static and wasted time and opportunities. But there’s plenty of room for Mr. Trump, as he insists he must, to do it his way, and still get a better handle on the campaign.
One of his talents as a communicator is sheer repetition, which, when he’s on to something that works, attains a certain power. Everyone knew in 2016 that he wanted to build a wall and have Mexico pay for it. It would be quite natural for him, if he settled on this approach, to call Ms. Harris “weak” 50 times a day.
He has also, in the past, been able to pithily and memorably nail core weaknesses of his opponents. His nicknaming may be a schoolyard tactic, yet it has often been effective tool, whether it was “Crooked Hillary” (underling Hillary Clinton’s ethical lapses) or “Little Marco” (diminishing a young primary opponent who lacked gravity). Even people who don’t like Trump or his nicknames would end up using these sobriquets.
Mr. Trump’s campaign has been shrewd to begin to hold smaller, thematic-focused events rather than just set him loose at rallies, where there is the most opportunity for self-sabotaging riffs.
Mr. Trump has said he wants to do to his opponents what they are doing to him. At the end of the day, what they are undertaking is a focused, intelligently designed campaign to disqualify him. Responding in kind doesn’t mean lashing out in Truth Social posts, but crafting a comprehensive anti-Harris argument that implicates, in turn, her suitability for the highest office in the land.

Rich Lowry is the editor in chief of National Review.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.































































Prudent Realist
Burlington, VTAug. 26

Yes, please, let’s base the election on Trump’s character vs. Harris’ character. This would lead to blue landslide.
Robert commented August 26
R
Robert
MinnesotaAug. 26

What bothers me is that Trump is normalized now, and the media treats him as a normal candidate seeing the highest office, as if he is qualified and ready. Nowhere in this article does it say that this person is not a felon, on parole, and waiting for sentencing. Or that he denied the 2020 election results (still does) and tried to overthrow the transfer of power. Or that he has seen 91 other felony inditements. Or that he has 2 impeachments. The list can grow from there as well as his quest to be an authoritarian leader and squash dissent to keep that.  It should be a red flag to all Americans of the chaos and threat to America, its citizens, and democracy. That is mainly what is on the ballot, not all the so-called policy he used to disguise what he really wants. Power.
Jeninct commented August 26
J
Jeninct
Connecticut,USAAug. 26

Seriously?  One could rewrite this switching the words Harris and Trump. It is, however, an interesting example of the fun-house mirror that the far right sees the world through.
newyorkjoe commented August 26
n
newyorkjoe
nycAug. 26

Of course, this sanitized argument ignores the fact that Trump tried to overturn the 2020 election, and finally sent an army of supporters to assault the Capitol to prevent the electoral count. Hang Mike Pence, anyone?

Since you referenced Romney, I'll reference Romney, who says in his upcoming book, "A very large portion of the GOP doesn't believe in the Constitution."  Do you, Mr. Lowry?
Nomind commented August 26
N
Nomind
NowhereAug. 26

Rather than focusing on facts, Mr. Lowry advocates that Republicans focus their campaign against Vice President Harris using ad hominem attacks, calling her a weak opportunist. 

In that spirit, let me suggest that Mr. Lowry is guilty of motivated reasoning, of being blinded by his own cognitive biases, of overlooking the myriad ways Donald Trump poses a danger to our democracy. Perhaps Mr. Lowry has his own opportunist reasons for penning this  essay.

Such arguments might score points with the Fox News viewership, but regular readers of this newspaper know that Kamala Harris has devoted her life to public whereas Mr. Trump is nothing more than a self-dealing grifter. It's true that he understands the first principle of advertising: repetition sells. But Mr. Lowry seems to thinks that's a virtue or a power. 

The notion that Mr. Trump, a convicted felon and sexual abuser, can win on character would be laughable if it wasn't so pathetic.
observer commented August 26
o
observer
MinnesotaAug. 26

Wow. Question her character. Implicate her suitability for the highest office in the land. Coming from the lowest character candidate imaginable, and a person whose lack of suitability for the highest office in the land off the charts, this strategy is going to be one for the books. This sounds like it's from the Onion.
Kel commented August 26
K
Kel
EarthAug. 26

Talk about the epitome of 'weird.' 
"Everything has to be connected to the deeper case that Ms. Harris is weak, a phony, and doesn't truly care about the country or the middle class."
That, Mr. Lowry, is an apt description of Trump who called his supporters, "Basement dwellers." I don't find it describing Ms. Harris at all. Your essay seems predicated on convincing the voters of something untrue.
Mustang Bobby commented August 26
M
Mustang Bobby
Miami, FLAug. 26

Dear Mr. Lowry:

Thank you for your submission to "Saturday Night Live" and the open call for comedy skits.  Unfortunately, your attempt at humor bears witness to the fact that your strong suit lies somewhere else, but keep trying; satire is a delicate art.

Best wishes in your future endeavors.
Don commented August 26
D
Don
PhiladelphiaAug. 26

Thanks for reminding us that unfounded character attacks by opposition political strategists present danger to this country & its citizens as much as Putin or phony conspiracy theorists. Just imagine if a much more qualified Kerry had been elected instead of W? Let’s not remake that awful movie starring Trump. Please.
S. Bush commented August 26
S
S. Bush
Gwynedd Valley, PAAug. 26

Yes, of course, a man of character. A man who cheated on all three of his wives. A man who was convicted of sexually abusing a woman. A man who has been convicted of 34 felonies. A man who routinely stiffed small contractors who did work for him. A man who believes that it's okay to grab women by their genitals if you're a famous man, as he is. Character? As in common dictionary terms "mental and moral qualities distinctive to an individual?" I know that Mr. Lowry wanted to define "character" as something different from what people usually think, but his argument is both odious and simplistic, reminiscent of Hannah Arendt's description of the banality of evil.
Bernard commented August 26
B
Bernard
VirginiaAug. 26

"the deeper case that Ms. Harris is weak, a phony, and doesn’t truly care about the country or the middle class"?
Does Rich Lowry think there is a personal insult Trump hasn't yet thrown against Harris? He's been through them all. If "Comrade Kamala" doesn't stick, he may go back to the ones Lowry suggests. 
But there is no way on God's green earth that Trump is going to win a contest of character. The prosecutor vs. the felon story line is set in stone.
Philippe Egalité commented August 26
P
Philippe Egalité
Le MondeAug. 26

This is an unserious piece. Even if it weren’t riddled with fun-house mirror interpretations of Kamala Harris and this country, the attempt to suggest that Donald Trump has any character falls completely flat in the face of literally seven decades of evidence to the contrary.
Erik commented August 26
E
Erik
NCAug. 26

I thought this would be wickedly funny satire until I saw the writer’s name. Man, these guys are getting desperate. On one side there’s Harris, the former prosecutor and AG, who changed some positions she had at one time during a crowded primary (like every politician, ever) and during the whirlwind campaign launch and primary so far has not sat down for a long form interview. On the other side, you have the guy who was a millionaire by age 8, had multiple bankruptcies, had a charitable organization and businesses shuttered for fraud, was the only U.S. President ever impeached twice, owes hundreds of millions of dollars in damages for his family business’s fraudulent activities, owes almost another $100 million in damages for sexual abuse, was found guilty of 34 felonies for falsifying business records to hide payments to a porn star from voters, is currently under indictment and awaiting trial for numerous other crimes, including inciting insurrection and attempting to obstruct the peaceful transfer of power and campaigns by constant lying, name calling, whining, late night rage-tweeting and rambling, incoherent rallies starring the late, great Hannibal Lector. Yeah, let’s have that discussion about character.
Homeskillet commented August 26
H
Homeskillet
H-TownAug. 26

Seems like all Republicans have shared amnesia about January 6th, 2021, including the author.   As for myself, and perhaps many others in this country, January 6th 2021 will be the only thing I will be thinking about when I vote for Democrats straight down the ballot this November.
DV commented August 26
D
DV
DCAug. 26

You don't have to be a psychologist to understand what's wrong with Donald Trump, and why he is not fit to to lead anything, much less a nation.  I'm an Anthropologist, not a Psychologist, but we often are exposed to personalities that fit the clinical description of Narcissistic personality disorder. 
 NPD is a chronic mental health condition that affects how people view themselves and relate to others. People with NPD have an exaggerated sense of self-importance and an excessive need for admiration and attention. They may also lack empathy and have difficulty handling criticism. NPD can cause significant impairment in social and occupational settings, and can harm a person's physical and mental health. When that person is the President of the United States the consequences of his aberrant behavior are shared not by a family, but by a nation.  We endured 4 years of Trump's presidency and from a scientific point of view, the American people are very lucky we survived.  All bets are off on a Second Trump Term.
Greg Monforton commented August 26
G
Greg Monforton
LaSalle, OntarioAug. 26

The author is referring to tactics and strategy, not the virtues that constitute character. If you believe Trump’s attributes constitute good character then we are all in far deeper trouble than we previously thought.
M. J. Shepley commented August 26
M
M. J. Shepley
SacramentoAug. 26

A little humor break is always good, especially when tongue in cheek ironic.

T didn't build the wall. Mexico didn't pay a peso. Was a dumb fail idea from word one.

But I wanna know, when prices were rising everywhere in the Great Inflation thing, what did T do.

Did he hold the line to help the little people (well, little...)?

Or did he join the oligarch elite sharks in a gouging frenzy?

I know which way I'd bet. In that and on his doing nothing to prevent the sharks in the future.
Jack commented August 26
J
Jack
DCAug. 26

I laughed out loud when I read the headline.  I thought it was by a guest writer from The Onion or by the Washington Post's Alexandra Petri.  Seriously... the words "Trump" and "Character" could never be used together in a sentence that had any anchor in reality.
Louis commented August 26
Louis
Louis
San Clemente, CAAug. 26

Trump is certainly a character.  American women seem to be the best judges.  I hope they destroy the Republican Party come November.  

Adam Kinzinger's serious talk at the Democratic Convention made a lot of sense.  John Bolton, Trump's National Security Advisor, has issued a dire warning about Trump's grasp of reality.
chamber commented August 26
c
chamber
new yorkAug. 26

"It's basically a tossup race" is complete nonsense. trump is done. It is now Kamala Harris' race to lose, but she won't.
Unlike her opponent she has the ability to stick to a subject, to deliver a message, and to stay positive.
trump's sniveling, whining, criminal "character" won't win him any undecided voters.
trumps next destination? The federal hoosegow.
Alex commented August 26
A
Alex
Alexandria, VAAug. 26

There's nothing shrewd about how Trump is running his campaign. You want to attack Harris on character? Trump has got you beat. He is the most incompetent, mercurial, ignorant, greedy President that has ever held office. Trump has less integrity than a mid-level mob boss. He is not running on principles or ideology, he running is to avoid prison time and fines and he will sacrifice our democracy to achieve that goal. You may be callign Harris weak, but you and your fellow Republicans need to look in the mirror.
Crystal commented August 26
C
Crystal
WIAug. 26

Flip flopping on issues is disqualifying?  Let's start with the candidate that started out as a Democrat and supported Democratic candidates and causes.  Oh and who was also pro-choice. 
And those are the least of his character flaws.   
Oh yes, let's make this a debate about character.
Mike Blair commented August 26
M
Mike Blair
MOAug. 26

Laughable. 
To wit: "this guy" wants the worst character in U.S. presidential history to assail a real human being's character. Typical republican, but laughable.
Raul commented August 26
R
Raul
NHAug. 26

I’m never ever sure how to take opinion pieces like this one. It kind of starts with its title where Trump and character appear in one sentence. Once one gets past the title, so much of what follows is twisted logic. Without repeating many of the details noted in other comments, if common sense prevailed Trump would have been disqualified years ago if voters simply voted on his character.
Tom commented August 26
T
Tom
FloridaAug. 26

The headline is misleading.  One might assume that the piece will tell how Trump has the character to win when what it is really doing is encouraging Trump, who has no character or principles, to go after the character of his opponent.  That alone says all one needs to know about both Trump's character and the character of the writer.
NIMN commented August 26
N
NIMN
ColoradoAug. 26

I thought this was going to be satire when I read the headline. To say I was shocked to find that it isn't, is a gigantic understatement. I am sad, angry, disappointed and more. To publish a piece - even an opinion piece - like this shows how far we have gone to normalizing  Trump and his supporters' opinions. Just having an opinion does not make it worthy of consideration and publication. It should have some merit.

Giving space to opinions that are completely the opposite of anything a normal, decent person would think is going way beyond "fairness". It is beyond the pale.
steve rodriguez commented August 26
s
steve rodriguez
San DiegoAug. 26

Trump doesn’t “craft” anything. He bullies, and rambles, and blusters, and whines.
BrewDoc commented August 26
B
BrewDoc
Rural WisconsinAug. 26

If Trump wins this election with his character democracy is lost and this country doesn’t deserve to have it.
A E Henderson commented August 26
A
A E Henderson
FloridaAug. 26

Is this a joke? Please make this race about character! Let’s all see how the convicted felon, adjudicated fraudster and sexual abuser, pathological liar without equal,serial adulterer, thief of highly classified documents and leader of a blatant attempt to overturn the results of the election and the violent overthrow our government, yes, let’s judge his character against VicePresident Harris.  Please.
BLF commented August 26
B
BLF
VirginiaAug. 26

It’s really shocking that the NYT would publish this piece. While I understand and agree with the need to publish opposing views, something as completely absurd as this piece fails to forward any meaningful dialogue. To suggest that Mr. Trump is a candidate of anything other than the basest character based on his words and deeds borders on offensive. Ms. Harris, whatever her character flaws may be, would indeed need to stoop to unimaginable depths to lose a race based on character.
Marlene commented August 26
M
Marlene
CanadaAug. 26

The title alone made me gag. Trump doesn't HAVE character. He has no moral compass. He brags of assaulting women because he can. He brags of not paying his fair share of income tax. He brags of dong stuff he's never done. It's a simple google search to know he's lying. He doesn't know how to tell the truth. Wave the arms around, accordion hands are his tell. He cheats at everything in life and the party gave him license to lie and mock anyone who he deems unworthy to be in his presence or circle.
Alice Hoquet commented August 26
A
Alice Hoquet
NYAug. 26

On Sunday, the New York Times reported that former President Donald Trump and Sen. JD Vance are pushing hard the false claim that millions of noncitizens will vote in this election. “When [Kamala Harris] let in millions of illegal aliens,” Vance told a rally in Michigan, “it made our communities less safe — but it did give the Democrats a lot of voters.”

What does Mr Lowry think of a campaign that would say that?  

Does Mr Lowry’s have the character to admit that is a thoroughly baseless lie?  Does Mr Lowry have the character to admit that they’re priming the pump to deny the validity of the election when they lose?  Does Mr Lowry have the character to reject candidates who would do such a thing?
Look at All the Nope commented August 26
L
Look at All the Nope
Syracuse, NYAug. 26

"Everything has to be connected to the deeper case that Ms. Harris is weak, a phony, and doesn’t truly care about the country or the middle class."

That's an awfully large stone to lob from your glass house, champ. Project much?
Ann commented August 26
A
Ann
BaltimoreAug. 26

Yeah, Harris is likely not the candidate I would have gravitated to had there been a real primary this election cycle. But I am grateful that Biden finally did the right thing, and hope that she prevails. As clever as Trump can be in taking advantage of deep currents of resentment and fear, he is unable to behave in a way that is rational. I don't care if Harris is an opportunist. She isn't Trump.
Dennis Smith commented August 26
Dennis Smith
Dennis Smith
Des Moines, IAAug. 26

When I saw the headline—“Trump Can Win on Character”—I mistakenly thought for a moment that the author would be addressing Trump’s character. Silly me. Of course it’s all about tearing down the “character” of a person morally and intellectually his clear superior by…doing what he’s always done. And this gets ink in the Times? Wow.
200F commented August 26
2
200F
MaineAug. 26

Oh yes, Rich—definitely a winning strategy to focus on contrasting character. Brilliant.
Bill White commented August 26
B
Bill White
IthacaAug. 26

I thought the title must be tongue-in-cheek: Trump win on character - but no, Mr. Lowry writes this with a straight face. 
Then I see the line "Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life", which is how any reasonable person would interpret the word "character."
As for "the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency" - while one might raise that question with respect to Ms. Harris, there is no question here with respect to Trump: we have seen him in action and the answer is a resounding no! Historians have correctly rated him as the absolute worse president in modern history.
Comical that Lowry could be that clueless.
academic commented August 26
a
academic
NYCAAug. 26

A whole piece on Trump’s character without the mention of "convicted felon." Nor do many of the comments mention that tinsy little fact. I guess that's no longer something we consider a flaw?
Biff commented August 26
B
Biff
Santa FeAug. 26

@Ed No, his convictions were by a jury, and they are not likely to be overturned.
Mark commented August 26
M
Mark
Hayward caAug. 26

From the tone of this and other articles (that were generally predicted in advance), the NYT will do their best to attack Ms Harris's character and give Mr Trump a total "get out of jail free
 card... literally.
Janet commented August 26
J
Janet
NashvilleAug. 26

So the author's premise is, that Trump can win by attacking Harris's character? I don't know whether to laugh or cry.
To start, Trump has zero character. It's tough for him to attack an opponent's character when he's facing multiple felony convictions.
Next, Kamala Harris lost a primary for a variety of reasons, none of which had anything to do with character.
Finally, does the author know that Kamala Harris was the Vice President and not the President? She was not responsible for Joe Biden's policies. She could have expressed her own opinions to Me. Biden on his policies, but that's it. Like everyone else, the VP serves at the pleasure of the President. 
I never understood the argument that Biden's policies were their policies. That's ridiculous. "They" are not the President. They are the President and Vice President. There is only one President at a time.
This is a ridiculous column.
Anna Graham commented August 26
A
Anna Graham
BataviaAug. 26

I almost spit my cornflakes out my nose laughing at the comment about “verbal hiccups”. Trump is the hands-down king of verbal hiccups.  In fact, one might characterize his verbal gaffes more accurately as belches or even potus flatus!  Thanks for today’s laugh.
Voter commented August 26
V
Voter
CAAug. 26

Trump’s character:  Trump has threatened Liz Cheney with a military tribunal, and he has said that General Milley should be tried for treason, punishable by death.  Prison, trial, and possible execution are what he envisions for people who oppose him.  This is his character.
Scotto commented August 26
S
Scotto
BronxAug. 26

@AACNY Why should she do interviews? She's winning without them.

Remember Trump participating in the Republican debates? No, because he ran away from them.
Tom Robinson commented August 26
T
Tom Robinson
BuffaloAug. 26

Remember when Rich Lowry was a principled conservative? That Rich may have focused on the multitude of former cabinet members, advisors, republican members of congress, oh and vice president, that have all repeatedly stated Trump does not have the character and is unfit for the office of the president
Richard commented August 26
R
Richard
North CarolinaAug. 26

I am embarrassed for the University of Virginia that this person identifies as a proud alum. Finding pseudo-intellectual justifications for staying on the team bus, rather than advocating for what is best for the country and world is not the action of a moral man.
Michael K commented August 26
M
Michael K
TallahasseeAug. 26

I can think of no character trait more shape shifting than the pathological lying that spews forth from a man who will say anything to anyone to get a vote. It’s like trying to bail jello to a wall. 

Harris is smart to define herself on her terms, not by a twice-impeached convicted felon and adjudicated sexual abuser. 

Character does matter.
philgat commented August 26
p
philgat
PennsylvaniaAug. 26

@Prudent Realist Two thoughts: First, Trump has proven over and over again that he’s incapable of following Rich’s advice.  Second, even if  Harris has the “character flaws”  Rich has cited, the quality of her character far exceeds Trump’s.
From the Heartland commented August 26
From the Heartland
From the Heartland
🎸🎸🎸Aug. 26

John Kerry didn't lose due to a tagline about an Iraq funding bill. He lost because too many Americans were brainwashed into swallowing the upside down 'Swift Boat' narrative that presented a hero as a coward and vice versa.  The same form of GOP logic drives this column.
Michael Rosenzweig commented August 26
M
Michael Rosenzweig
Atlanta GAAug. 26

This article reflects the moral depravity of anyone still favoring Trump for president. The author focuses entirely on tactics that he asserts Trump can use effectively in attacking Harris’s character. Seriously? How about focusing on the actual character of each candidate? No sane person would seriously claim that, on matters of character, Trump is superior to Harris, and the reason is as simple as it is obvious: There is not a shred of doubt that Trump is the most morally and ethically bankrupt candidate for president in the history of this country, nor does anybody dispute that he is a serial, pathological liar. Sorry, but no clever campaign tactics can hide the fact that, when it comes to character, nobody, not Harris or anyone else, comes even remotely close to possessing a character as horrific and despicable as Trump’s. That alone disqualifies him from ever again being president.
Lawrence commented August 26
L
Lawrence
Washington D.C.Aug. 26

Trump should run on character. Brilliant idea and advice all hope he takes. 

Serial marital infidelity.
Serial bankruptcy. 
34 felony convictions.
Sexual abuse of a woman.
Fraudulent business after fraudulent business. 
34,000 lies and counting.

If you have friends like that you are probably in prison, or on the way there. 

You wouldn't let someone like that in your home, or want to be seen with them, lest a stench that couldn't be washed away get on you.  You would not let them chat up a young female relation.  They would be told to stop, at once. And leave. Now.
John Meerts commented August 26
J
John Meerts
Boulder COAug. 26

Ms. Harris is weak, a phony, and doesn’t truly care about the country or the middle class.

Come again?   And Trump does?   Give me a break.
Elizabeth Thomas commented August 26
E
Elizabeth Thomas
Bluemont, VAAug. 26

Unbelievable. It is impossible to take this article seriously when the premise is based on a candidate's character. No one fails this test more definitively than Donald Trump. Leave Kamala Harris alone. The character wars have Trump losing every time, regardless of pep talks by staff.
Sara commented August 26
S
Sara
BrooklynAug. 26

Really, a convicted felon (i.e., fraudster and liar) who has also been found by a jury to have sexually assaulted a woman (whom he continues to slander) and who is known to have been a long-time bigot, etc. is going to prevail on character. I don't time think this argument merits the dignity of a detailed analysis.
K commented August 26
K
K
FLAug. 26

Character? Trump led the January 6 insurrection!  Never before have we had an as corrupt president in the USA.
Vanessa commented August 26
V
Vanessa
Blooming Grove NYAug. 26

Actually, none of what you say about VP Harris is true.  So if this is election about mud slinging than, as usual, Trump would win.  But this is an election about real people, with real credentials, and a sincere desire to serve the people. On that basis, VP Harris definitely will win.
Scuba Saba commented August 26
S
Scuba Saba
HoustonAug. 26

Character, well sure. Kamala easily redirects character attacks by simply starting out any response by saying The Felon has said ____________ about me. Character indeed.
Kathy commented August 26
K
Kathy
SFAug. 26

As women around the world know all too well, the world is full of really gross men who think they're great. We've already heard and seen far too much of you.
Simon commented August 26
S
Simon
GermanyAug. 26

I wondered if this was intended as satire.  But then, no, a genuine analysis. Of sorts. 

Of course, don't talk about "personal character" because the lies, crimes, misogyny and dubious business practices are really not something to flaunt as good things. 

So let's talk about ... er.  what?
AM commented August 26
A
AM
Radnor PAAug. 26

As an independent, I am incredulous as to why the GOP chose Trump as its candidate given his obvious bad guy history (e.g. insurrection attempt, name calling, divisive personality). Harris is gaining momentum largely because she is not Trump nor Biden. Her personality is winning and that's a marker for character even though her favorability ratings before she was at the top of the ticket were poor. You are correct, many votes don't consider the details of policy on the big issues are voting on who they like or most recently who they do not like. Its hard to like Trump. Its easy to like Haley. Why did the GOP chose Trump vs Haley when this simple obvious truth was so clear? When the contest is between 2 likable candidates (e.g. Obama vs McCain), the discussion can then move toward policy difference between the candidates. But in 2024, Trump will not win the character race.
ShawnO commented August 26
S
ShawnO
BainbridgeAug. 26

The title of the piece is a classic bait and switch, pulling in readers who are cannot fathom how Trump and character could possibly fit together constructively. Of course, there is no attempt to laud Trump’s character and the article title is quickly revealed as a hoax. Is this how they do things at the National Review Mr. Lowry?
Rose commented August 26
R
Rose
St. LouisAug. 26

Character?  Mr Trump should emphasize character in his campaign against Vice President Harris?  Go for it, Mr. Trump.  Explain to the people the characteristics that make up your character and how lacking Harris is -- your lying, the racism, the misogyny, the multiple marriages, the felony convictions, the assaults on women, the fact that your third wife also detests you, and, of course, the mismanagement of every endeavor you were ever engaged in especially the presidency!  

Trump will ignore this advice, too, because he will never read it.  The man acts out his impulses like an overgrown puppy that has never learned any curb on his instincts.  Disgusting and dangerous.
Chris commented August 26
C
Chris
CAAug. 26

"To wit: Ms. Harris was too weak to win the Democratic primary contest this year. She was too weak to keep from telling the left practically everything it wanted to hear when she ran in 2019. She is too weak to hold open town-hall events or do extensive — or, at the moment, any — sit-down media interviews."

And yet with all this "weakness" it looks like Trump is going to try to back out of the debate.  So tell me, who is weak again??
Bob Brussack commented August 26
B
Bob Brussack
IrelandAug. 26

I have not read this piece, and I have no inclination to read it. Rich Lowery and the National Review years ago, with the rise of Trump, forfeited any claim they had to the mantle of responsible conservative voice. I honestly don't know what purpose it serves for the Times to devote any of its precious column space to Mr. Lowery. The only conservatives worth a read these days are the ones who accept as a starting point that the threat to the American Experiment is real and substantial. I'm very grateful to the handful of conservatives who've made clear that they're prepared to postpone their policy agendas to ensure that their positions and the positions of liberals and progressives can be considered within a framework of liberal democracy, as the Framers obviously intended. Trump arguably is the rogue the Framers anticipated when they created the electoral college as a veto over a besotted temporary majority. Ironically, it's the electoral college, shown unable to carry out its responsibility in 2016, that now has created Trump's only real chance to take the White House again.
akp3 commented August 26
a
akp3
Asheville, NCAug. 26

Mr. Lowry ... your essay reminded me of a classic Gary Larson Far Side cartoon ... the one with the dog, hiding behind the washing machine, trying to lure his nemesis the cat into the clothes dryer with "Cat Fud" signs.  The dog is saying to himself, "Oh please, oh please."

So yes, Mr. Lowry, let's by all means make the election about personal character ... "oh please, oh please"!
Ellyn H commented August 26
E
Ellyn H
PhiladelphiaAug. 26

It's mind-boggling to see trump being normalized and treated as a legitimate candidate. This election isn't a choice. There's no precedent for running against a convicted felon, let alone someone who, the last time he lost, led a violent and deadly insurrection (which is what he should've been convicted for). Next election we may have the luxury of having an actual choice. Depending on the outcome of this election, of course.
Duke commented August 26
D
Duke
Somewhere southAug. 26

Mr. Lowry,
I was intrigued by the nonsensical title of your article, and so I continued reading...
I got through the first few paragraphs, but one question kept popping up in my mind:
What planet are you writing this from?
Certainly not Earth.
You see, here on Earth, even the Republicans recognize that Donald Trump is a character (in a very very bad way), but does not have the slightest iota of "character" in the good sense.  He can't even fake it.
You and your National Review and the GOP are stuck with him.
But the rest of America is not, and will prove it on Nov. 5.
Nate W commented August 26
N
Nate W
AmherstAug. 26

Mr. Lowry is the editor of the National Review. His publication seems like a more suitable place for advice for the Trump campaign.  Or, he could just pick up the telephone and call him.  I don't think that readers of the New York Times need to hear it as well.
James C. commented August 26
J
James C.
MarylandAug. 26

Rich Lowry's column highlights an important thing about being a Trump supporter.  Lowry is much more educated (attended University of Virginia) than average Trump voters, but basically thinks the same as they do. Once you buy into MAGA world, your education is all for naught. Using Trump and "character" in the same sentence is the ultimate oxymoron.
DH commented August 26
D
DH
CAAug. 26

Trump cannot win on character.  Trump can maybe win on character attacks.  Those are very different things.
CMP commented August 26
C
CMP
NJAug. 26

@Prudent Realist 

How true.

Lowry's notion that Trump, a convicted felon, a lifelong racist, a sexual predator found liable for sexual abuse and defamation, who is also a conman found liable for massive business fraud can can run against Harris on issues of character is ridiculous.
Elizabeth commented August 26
E
Elizabeth
TorontoAug. 26

As I understand the word, when we talk about a person's "character," we are referring to the set of moral and ethical qualities, traits, and behaviors that define how an individual acts and interacts with others. Things like their integrity, honesty, courage, loyalty, and other virtues that indicate moral strength. 

Character encompasses our values, attitudes, and overall disposition. It influences how we make decisions and handle situations, especially those involving ethical or moral dilemmas.

Most importantly, I see "character" as being the internal compass that guides our actions and choices, ultimately determining trustworthiness and reliability.

In the very broadest reading of this definition, Trump exhibits exactly zero of these qualities.
Tracey commented August 26
T
Tracey
NYCAug. 26

Trump, the candidate of character and substance.  I'd write more, but I just fell out of my chair laughing hysterically.
Independents decide elections commented August 26
I
Independents decide elections
New YorkAug. 26

Love to see how accurately Harris was described here.

It is a breath of fresh air from the excessive and disingenuous fawning of how great she is.

She is not the answer to America's problems but rather a big cause of them. She keeps failing upwards and that's no place for the POTUS.

Stop already with the retorts abut Trump, this is about her and her qualifications or complete lack thereof.
Someone commented August 26
S
Someone
BostonAug. 26

I couldn't finish the article, I was laughing too hard.  Please, Mr. Lowry, do tell us more about Mr. Trump's character.  He is also, at the very least, a heartless capitalist who does not care about "the people".  It's been abundantly clear from the beginning that this campaign was about staying out of jail.  There is another op-ed in this very paper, right now, describing how no one has any idea where money donated to Trump is going. Kids in cages.  

Kamala Harris sure doesn't look weak to me.  And neither does the hundreds of millions she brought in last week.
Rich commented August 26
R
Rich
CaliforniaAug. 26

Donald Trump is a lying two-timing cheat who tried to fake election fraud when he lost fair and square. Hard for him to run on character.  After choking on his response to the Covid Crisis, it is hard for Trump to run on cool headed competence.  Toilet paper may be more expensive, but at least it is available.
Prof one commented August 26
P
Prof one
MAAug. 26

The thing is Mr. Lowry, no amount of advice, campaigning, or change in tactics will change someone’s TRUE character. 

And we all know Trumps True character— or lack of it.
A D commented August 26
A
A D
The MoonAug. 26

Wait a minute.

We ARE talking about the guy who refused
the Peaceful Exchange of Power and tried to overturn
the results of a settled National election, arent we?

The guy who pointed an angry armed mob at his own Capitol to disrupt Congressional business (resulting in multiple deaths)?

As I understand it, to project "character", you need to first demonstrate things like integrity, honor, values, empathy, trustworthiness.

Trump has proven he has none of those qualities --
in fact, he sees those qualities as flaws and weaknesses.

Character, as a winning quality, is NOT,
and never has been,
available to Trump.

On the other hand, he may BE "a character" --
but as a walking talking cartoon of a failed human being.

And I don't think that kind of "character"
will be winning any elections anytime soon.
Carol commented August 26
C
Carol
NEOAug. 26

Does the author mean "character" in the sense that "DJT is a real character"? In that sense he could win - if that's all we want as POTUS. Sad...
Joseph Dugan commented August 26
J
Joseph Dugan
Solvang, CAAug. 26

“Presidential races are won and lost on character as much as the issues……”

Harris should win in a landslide!
Bill commented August 26
B
Bill
MIAug. 26

Trump's character, or lack of it is not the most important factor to consider in this election. 
It is the hidden army of "specialists" who helped write the 2025 document who will actually be in charge of the government that we should keep in mind when casting our ballots.
Trump is merely a hood ornament whose sole purpose is to distract us from seeing the real run-a-way train bearing down upon us.
Choose wisely. Choose Harris.
Bonnie Huggins commented August 26
B
Bonnie Huggins
DenverAug. 26

@Prudent Realist
The problem is, men are allowed to be bloviating jerks while women are easily degraded because Americans inherently hate women.
Clyde Cortright commented August 26
C
Clyde Cortright
Weymouth MaAug. 26

I live for n a blue state, so I don’t see the tv ads playing in swing states. 
I hope the ads include videos of Hurricane Katrina, explaining that EVERY federal agency will be run like FEMA under W Bush, after Trump replaces every federal employee with no-talent yesmen.
Wink commented August 26
W
Wink
ChicagoAug. 26

Are we talking the guy who mocked the disabled reporter back in 2016? That guy? The guy who has no remorse about anything? No conscience? The one who denigrated our military? Who sees women as objects he feels free to assault? Who thinks nothing of insulting and degrading anyone who he feels threatened by? That guy?
Rob commented August 26
R
Rob
Austin, TXAug. 26

Harris has to run like she is ten points down everywhere, no matter what the polls say. Keep the pressure on, don’t take your foot off Trump’s throat. Everyone else: VOTE!
John commented August 26
J
John
BostonAug. 26

Please explain how the Vice President has any power to "secure the border" or "address inflation." The US Constitution delegates to the Vice President precisely one meaningful power while they are in office -- breaking ties in the Senate. On that score, Harris has done her job well.
Marc commented August 26
M
Marc
HoustonAug. 26

This is a parody right?

An entitled billionaire convicted felon vs the competent state prosecutor from the middle class?
Mark commented August 26
M
Mark
ChicagoAug. 26

@AACNY Uh, nope. Big nope.

There’s a critical difference between choosing not to face interviewers this far and being unable to face interviewers. She will. Soon. Just watch.

And the press has come nowhere near lambasting Trump. He conducts safe “interviews” and never provides concrete answers to direct questions.
drindl commented August 26
d
drindl
NYAug. 26

This is just sad, pathetic and shows Republicans' desperation. You want this election to be about character?  BRING IT.
Middlemania commented August 26
M
Middlemania
MDAug. 26

This from Mr. Lowry, the person who asks for the proof that Trump will end democracy….as if Trump’s own words or actions don’t count. This is a breath-taking piece, but not because it reveals anything about Ms. Harris. This is an almost perfect look inside the machinations and mental gymnastics required of those former never-Trump conservatives who nonetheless have found a way back to Trump after their electoral alternatives faltered.  Mr. Lowry’s unquestionable talent at casting both light and shade on any issue provides the clearest picture of the cognitive dissonance to which this group has availed itself.  It’s as if standing in the driveway of his own burned-down mansion he takes scornful note of a crooked shutter slat in the house across the street.  From my point of view it seems the real story is what the ashes of the conservative intelligentsia will do, and how far they will go, in their struggle to retain relevance within a transformed party.
Jimmy commented August 26
J
Jimmy
BrooklynAug. 26

When it comes to a newspaper whose editorial board vocally acknowledged on several occasions the existential danger of another Trump presidency...

...shouldn't the editorial room's "conventional wisdom" err on the side of, I don't know...opting NOT to publish op-eds expounding on potential routes to a Trump win? Yeesh.
HJB commented August 26
HJB
HJB
New YorkAug. 26

In a million years, William F. Buckley, the original editor in chief of National Review, would not have done anything to enhance the election prospects of Donald Trump. Indeed, he might well have used his abilities to successfully prevent Trump from being nominated, in view of the obvious deficiencies in Trump's character. Shame on Lowry for selling out true conservatism.
Steve Bolger commented August 26
Steve Bolger
Steve Bolger
New York CityAug. 26

So far Trump has initiated 6 bankruptcies. Anyone who believes he is economically competent is incompetent.
Jeffrey Waingrow commented August 26
J
Jeffrey Waingrow
Sheffield, MAAug. 26

@Jeninct 

Finally The Times has started to include humorous pieces on the columnist side. Lowry, especially for a conservative, is a hoot. He cleverly went right past the ridiculous and straight to the absurd.
John commented August 26
J
John
Woodbury, NJAug. 26

How Trump might describe his character:

1) Laws are for the weak. Laws don't apply to strong people and nobody has ever been stronger than me. I've got the greatest character so I can be above the law. Even the Supreme Court, the beautiful Supreme Court, I love the Supreme Court now that I fixed it, says that I don't need to worry about laws.

2) I deserve my wealth and power because nobody has ever worked harder. I attended meetings you know. And sometimes I was on the set of the Apprentice, I was the best host ever nobody could host like me, for a couple of hours at a time. And I knew how to avoid invoices and taxes. Nobody was ever smarter about avoiding taxes. 

3) I'm entitled to retribution because I'm an old man now and I'm going to die one day and that's so unfair. Nobody has ever been treated so unfairly by death. I have a beautiful life. It's the greatest life. If I have to die someday then everyone should suffer. It's only fair. It's what you all deserve. I should have more time. You know, I ran for President because I was told that aliens had brought the secret of eternal life to Earth. Maybe it's not true. Or, the deep state is hiding it from me. So, I need a second term.

4) I'm superior. Everyone says so. And everyone know why so I won't say it so I don't get in trouble. 

5) Facts are for the weak. I make my own reality. It's very beautiful here. Everyone is good looking and they worship me. It's almost embarrassing but not really because I deserve it.
joel commented August 26
j
joel
somewhere, OHAug. 26

Trump declined to participate in any debates during the GOP primary. Guess he gets a pass on that character flaw?
Suslynn commented August 26
S
Suslynn
Oak ViewAug. 26

There is one positive thing about this opinion piece. I am now even more convinced of the depravity of the GOP and those who still support Mr Trump.
David Salkever commented August 26
D
David Salkever
Dedham, MAAug. 26

Lowry is almost as good at prevarication as Trump. The suggestion that real wages (or real total compensation) for workers has stagnated, and the implication that Trump had s better record on this, is simply wrong. All you have to do is check the BLS historical and recent data on the CPI and on Employer Costs for Employee Compensation (a bulletin published quarterly by the BLS). Because journalists and politicians don't bother to divide one number (CPI) into another (nominal wage or compensation per hour), they can manufacture their own history as to what has happened to real wages. The so-called Trump "boom" for workers looked much more like a bust, and real wages are clearly rising now (at about 1% per year - which is quite good in historical terms).
Rob commented August 26
R
Rob
Austin, TXAug. 26

@Prudent Realist  As much as I hope you are right, I would submit that a hard look at the Electoral College map is quite sobering.
John D Warnock commented August 26
J
John D Warnock
Thelma KYAug. 26

Win on Character? That is absurd. A key element of character is honesty, and trump has no idea what that entails.
Os Fan commented August 26
O
Os Fan
BaltimoreAug. 26

In the past, I viewed the National Review as the voice of the intellectual right. With this essay, Mr. Lowrey has  done in his world what his preferred candidate has done multiple times in the world of business. He has declared intellectual bankruptcy.
Rank N File commented August 26
R
Rank N File
Over thereAug. 26

I'm a single issue voter: did you try to overturn a free and fair election in violation of the Constitution? If the answer is yes to that, you should probably be not running for President and already in jail.
C Wolfe commented August 26
C Wolfe
C Wolfe
Bloomington INAug. 26

The columnist mistakes "character" for "image".

We're on to Trump's tricks. One of the few services Trump has performed (unwittingly) has been to educate us on not allowing ourselves to be swayed by these kinds of attacks that create a false image. These attacks do not reveal the target's character. The facts about a person's life and service reveal character.

We won't be fooled again.
Pete commented August 26
P
Pete
VermontAug. 26

We don't talk enough about character anymore. Traits like integrity, ethical behavior, truthfulness, intelligence, humanity, empathy, thoughtfulness, sense of right and wrong, modesty, etc. Let's score Mr. Trump on those.
Al Frank commented August 26
A
Al Frank
Kingston PAAug. 26

How pathetic that the hopes for a conservative agenda rests on the character of Donald Trump.
G. Upton commented August 26
G
G. Upton
Saint Paul, MNAug. 26

The headline surely brought in the desired clicks, but it was missing two characters--an apostrophe and a t.  One area where Mr. Trump simply cannot win over Ms. Harris is in character as used in this essay.  My Grandmother would have described him as "quite a character", but that's an entirely different connotation.
Alison Power commented August 26
A
Alison Power
Massena NYAug. 26

Harris is the phony? Trump has built a life on lies - about his wealth, about his “caring,” about his abilities, about his accomplishments, about his “religion.” He is a psychologically damaged individual who will continue to burn down this country to regain power and stay out of jail. I’m all for listening to opposing points of view, but this editorial is a bridge too far. The Times has done a disservice to its readers - again - by publishing it.
JK commented August 26
J
JK
ParisAug. 26

Trump can win on cheating, chicanery,bribery, collusion and perhaps other strategies. But character, Mr. Lowry? There isn't an honest bone in his body nor a sincere word that comes from his mouth. I understand that you, like other GOP operatives, are on a damage control mission for Mr. Trump and his big money backers. But frankly, for anyone who has not drunk the Trump Koolaid, character is his single least attractive attribute-even for many who have voted for him in the past.
.
Frank Grober commented August 26
F
Frank Grober
Oakland, CaliforniaAug. 26

This column is so crazy as to defy belief. Trump is a liar, a thief, and his interactions  with Putin make suggestions that Putin has something on him entirely plausible. Now here's something I caught during the debate with Biden that anybody can verify with the transcript which CNN has online. He said that Biden was taking money from China and called him a Manchurian candidate. He never repeated that charge later, has never offered any evidence for it, none of his supporters pushed it and it went seemingly totally unnoticed because people assumes that Trump just says things. 

Needless to say if it was true it would be an extremely important issue, about as important as it could possibly be. Now what does it say that Trump said something like that and nobody cares. That shows that all concerned take it for granted that Trump habitually lies. Of course a rejoinder which actually can be supported is that Trump is the Siberian candidate.
Barb Davis commented August 26
B
Barb Davis
Allegheny PlateauAug. 26

@Robert What’s so bothersome about all this is that while Harris’ is constantly criticized for not fleshing out even more detailed economic and immigration policy Trump just tells the media he will fix it—and it’s left at that.  The press does not push for specifics or when speaking with his supporters question what they specifically prefer of Trumps supposed policy specifics over Harris’.
Jane commented August 26
J
Jane
IllinoisAug. 26

Rich Lowry has a lot of gall to suggest trump has good character.  I wonder if he really believes that.  If he does, that says a lot about HIS character and integrity.
Democrats, stay alert and invested in this election!
Jazzmandel commented August 26
J
Jazzmandel
ChicagoAug. 26

Every Trump appearance is rife with lies and self-sabotaging quips. Same with Vance.  Neither has character that includes empathy for citizens or residents of America; both see the world in purely transactional ways. both are disqualified from leadership, especially the felon insurrectionist.
Liesa commented August 26
L
Liesa
Birmingham, ALAug. 26

NO serious and informed person of character can justify a vote for the man who has bragged about assaulting women, lied so much his supporters don't believe the world's strongest democracy even has free and fair elections, would sell out the country for a profit, has denigrated our fallen soldiers and the military writ large, has cheated innumerable times on all of his wives, etc.  How are people still acting like there is any real choice in this election for people of conscience?
Peter commented August 26
P
Peter
Irvine, CAAug. 26

"because she is a shape-shifting opportunist who can and will change on almost anything when politically convenient."

How rich, if Trump was to make this argument.  

The voter will see right through this.  Trump couldn't stick to a policy or political position if his life depended on it.  

Harris just needs to remind the voters of Trump's back-and-forth statements about abortion and IVF.
mother of two commented August 26
m
mother of two
ilAug. 26

@newyorkjoe  We know the answer.  Lowry would willingly overturn the election and our democracy if it led to what he perceives as the proper direction forward. 

May we all take notice of a man who supports an insurrectionist and social arsonist.
Joyce commented August 26
J
Joyce
PAAug. 26

Simple repetition of something does not make it true. Calling people schoolyard names does not make them true. These are Trump's strategies and indicative of his character.

The author is suggesting that these are  strategies of winning an election for president?

Let's hope the character of the American people can no longer stand the onslaught of that appeal by one candidate.  And shows up at the polls to indicate that they are ready to 
be done with the hate behind those strategies.
Vik commented August 26
V
Vik
NathanAug. 26

What weird chicanery next? Trump can win on his youth? Trump can win as a woman? Trump can win on his good looks? Or perhaps, Trump can win on his unimpeachable moral character? 

Lincoln (or someone) said 'You can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time.'  I hope he or she was right.
Felix Li commented August 26
F
Felix Li
PhiladelphiaAug. 26

Jan 6th disqualified Trump permanently from the Presidency for any real American patriot.

Regardless of your thoughts on policy, Kamala Harris respects America's democratic norms and the peaceful transition of power. That's why I'm voting for her, even though I don't agree with her on every policy
Charles commented August 26
C
Charles
washington dcAug. 26

Good advice Mr. Lowry but only for a candidate who isn’t Donald J. Trump.  Each of the attacks on Ms. Harris can be met with many more entirely in the same vein against Trump.  Do I really need to explain to you that “character” is not Trump’s strong suit?
Peter commented August 26
P
Peter
New York CityAug. 26

Point well taken. It’s difficult for me to believe anyone could find Harris less qualified than Trump on the basis of character. But then, it’s part of the mystery of the Trump phenomenon that we have underestimated far too often. Harris needs to be able to answer the questions Lowry poses. Surely Trump has the absolute worst character, the most unfit for the presidency, of any major candidate in US history. But everyone doesn’t see it that way.
Dan commented August 26
D
Dan
PhiladelphiaAug. 26

"Mr. Trump’s campaign has been shrewd to begin to hold smaller, thematic-focused events rather than just set him loose at rallies, where there is the most opportunity for self-sabotaging riffs."

Wow, the lack of self-awareness is breathtaking.

Is this sentence not proof Trump does not have the character to be president? If his campaign can't control him, who will control him as president?

I'm not sure how the demise of America helps the National Review, but it must somehow, if this is the drek they come up with.
Paul Gipson commented August 26
P
Paul Gipson
AZAug. 26

Trump only lies when his lips are moving (or when his social media accounts post something) so of course all the "Conservatives" at the NR believe him and believe in him. They are so caught up in their hate for America they would put a draft dodging coward back into office. Real Americans fired this fool once. Or maybe they  believe the Medal of Honor doesn't mean anything and it's better to donate to an election campaign than risk your life on the battlefield? My generation died in Vietnam while Trump managed to avoid VD. Trump thinks Vets are losers and suckers. Is that what Rich Lowry thinks? Character? The only character Trump has is the one he plays when he is on a rally stage.
Steven Brubaker commented August 26
S
Steven Brubaker
New YorkAug. 26

Character? A contest on character? You're kidding right. We know his character. It can't be revived, or updated. That's why his likability numbers are under water by 22 points. She was loyal to Biden. Picked a good vice presidential candidate, and she is liked and admired by friends and colleagues. Character? I don't know who you are, but I'm having doubts about your character.
Louis commented August 26
Louis
Louis
San Clemente, CAAug. 26

@Ann   California's Senators have been excellent for a long time.  Harris advanced to the Vice Presidency.  We know she is good.
Scott Oddman commented August 26
S
Scott Oddman
San Luis Obispo, CAAug. 26

How remarkable it is that The New York Times continues its campaign to normalize a racist, rapist, criminal conman—convicted 34 times over. What could possibly go wrong? It baffles the mind that the Times, rather than exposing the extraordinary threat Trump poses, seeks to stabilize the truly unstable, to humanize a monster, and to portray this election as a mere clash of differing views. By refusing to confront the gravity of Trump’s dangers, the Times speaks volumes—louder in silence than in any story ever told.
Robert L. Peters commented August 26
R
Robert L. Peters
DelawareAug. 26

I am very impressed the NYT published this.  It is good to see such articles, and the negative comments on these pages show how much the readership wants to remain in a bubble.
Historianess commented August 26
H
Historianess
NYCAug. 26

@Jeninct Honestly I thought this was satire until I saw the author is Rich Lowry (yeah--that guy, the one who thought Sarah Palin was winking just at him--lol).
Vincent Vega commented August 26
V
Vincent Vega
TampaAug. 26

So let me get this straight - the editor and chief of The National Review gets to write an op-ed in The New York Times extolling the virtues (against all evidence) of Trump's superior "character"? Seriously, why am I reading this? If I wanted to subscribe to The National Review, do you know what I'd do? I'd subscribe to The National Review!

Platforming conservative voices acting in bad faith is not playing it straight. I swear I read three similar pieces a week in the op-eds, do better NYT! If Mitt Romney or Liz Cheney have something to say I'll be more than happy to read it, despite our disagreements. The vast majority of other "conservative" voices do not deserve the ink.
Alex commented August 26
A
Alex
Williamsburg, VirginiaAug. 26

We used to tell our kids that, if you work hard and do your best, that you can be President. No one, not even hard core MAGA supporters, told their kids that when Trump was in office.  

Please, Mr. Lowry, explain it to me like I'm a kindergartner: What character has Mr. Trump displayed in his 78 years on this planet, let alone his 9 years of political life, that makes him a better choice than Mrs. Harris?

I'll wait.
John Edmondson commented August 26
J
John Edmondson
El Mirage, AZAug. 26

Rich Lowry is one of those garden variety Republicans from the Before Times. No matter how personally debasing it looks, he and others of his ilk, are determined to soft-pedal the scourge that is Donald Trump because they want to be conservatives in good standing when Trump finally leaves the stage. Someone like Lowry could find lucrative work in the Never Trump universe, but he insists on promoting Trump and wishing he can become what he clearly isn’t—a decent human being. It’s funny, I remember when Republicans cared about things like character and common decency. In the Before Times.
David Kreda commented August 26
D
David Kreda
New York, NYAug. 26

So, in effect, all of Mr. Trump's personal characteristics and personal behavior is off limits in assessing what he can bring to the Presidency?
And if there is no character, then ... his character-free plans?  There is Project 2025. No, no. His characterL he denies any aspect of it, even knowing about it. So I guess ... it is not a plan..
Can we at least judge him on his choice of J.D. Vance then?  Trump said he decided on Vance because, "he really liked me a lot." That sure reflects another aspect of his character. So we cannot decide on that ...
So ... guess Mr. Lowry is saying that there is, in the end, nothing to judge Trump by other than his ... stage presence. There he plays a character with terrible character.
Got it.
Jan commented August 26
J
Jan
Orlando, FLAug. 26

I did a double take when I read this headline—it could have been written by The Onion.  Is this author seriously suggesting that Trump has the high ground on character?  That he can win based on his character?  The irony is rich.
Eddie B. commented August 26
E
Eddie B.
TorontoAug. 26

Hmm... Interesting adivce for Donald Trump, the man who has shown us in many occasions all through his life to be completely void of integrity, honesty, faithfulness, dignity, and respectability.  I have no doubt that VP Harris campaign can deploy that advice much more effectively vis-à-vis Trump, than the other way around.
Steven Coleman commented August 26
S
Steven Coleman
MassachusettsAug. 26

No amount of attacking Harris' character will ever diminish the fact that Trump is an adjudicated sexual abuser and convicted felon. He will, of course, attack her character but it will just play out as his schtick and be ignored except by those already on board with ridiculous projections onto others of the character flaws he possesses.
Lucy commented August 26
L
Lucy
CaliforniaAug. 26

Sure, go with that Donald--go on "character". Better yet, go with your continuous lies and distortions. Those qualities have gotten you so far, why stop now? That's the best advice in this article and will surely serve you well. Wow. This article sets a new low
Citizen commented August 26
Citizen
Citizen
NYCAug. 26

Basic problem with this premise: It's not 2004.
That GOP doesn't exist anymore. 

Neither does that credulous public. 

And Donald Trump is not 'just another Republican'.  He has unique baggage that no amount of 'past performance' or campaign strategy is going to be able to erase.

Also, this isn't the old DNC.  

We're not running as Democrats versus Republicans, we're running as Americans versus Insurrectionists and nihilists, who think they can intimidate their way back into power.

They will not succeed.

We are the majority.  They are not, and never have been, as beneficiaries of a longstanding national strategy of naked apportionment abuse, called REDMAP.
MBBookworM commented August 26
M
MBBookworM
Auburn, New YorkAug. 26

You state that  character is not personal behavior, but “the attributes that play into the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency — is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans?”
The answers for Donald Trump are no, no, no, and no, and if this were an actual debate, I would have numerous factual rebuttals.
So why exactly would anyone choose Donald Trump over Kamala Harris if “character” is the main criteria?
Especially in light of the fact that he also refused to recognize the results of the previous election - also not a sign of good character.
Andrew B. Bosma commented August 26
A
Andrew B. Bosma
New JerseyAug. 26

Once we were introduced to the Orwellian notion of "alternative facts" by ignoble former Trump campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, it was inevitable that it would only be a matter of time until we'd reach the point where some other cynical, amoral Trump apologist (in this case, Mr. Lowery) would open the door to the preposterous idea of---even if only implied instead of explicitly stated as such---"alternative character."  

How does one in good conscience (and, of course, there lies the rub) attempt to connect Trump with character in anything but an ironic sense? That question is, of course, rhetorically posed [as one cannot].

Honestly, it's hard to take this piece remotely seriously, or even take the idea of that Mr. Lowry, himself, takes his titular proposition seriously (even if he's no doubt be happy--and shameless enough--to try and sell it to anyone gullible or willfully ignorant enough to buy it.
jimmy commented August 26
j
jimmy
miamiAug. 26

rich lowry has to be one of the most intellectually bankrupt people writing about politics today. go check out national review's ig for an example. for him to claim trump's character is even close to be a winning issue is laughable. trump cares more about the middle class than kamala? laughable. he cares more about women and women's rights? even more laughable. i get that you must try to appear balanced at all time but sure there is someone better than this guy to do that for you.
Pufferfish commented August 26
Pufferfish
Pufferfish
CAAug. 26

The main criticism leveled by Lowry at KH is "she is a shape-shifting opportunist who can and will change on almost anything when politically convenient. "

Let's think about this idea; is it better for a world leader to change positions based on circumstances or not?  I can think of three notoriously stubborn, intransigent over 50 men who have taken pretty good countries and guided them to ruin.  If Putin could back down, and admit a loss face face, it would have spared a million lives and not caused so much destruction.  Xi had a blossoming economy that 'Xi thought' has turned into a place that people refuse to sentence newborn to a lifetime sentence if being in it.

The real question is, what underlying moral code gas KH followed?  Looks to me like self promotion has been there, but is not ambition the root of every politician? (The world needs a little more of that secret sauce known as ME) I know the KH trajectory as I was in SF and the east bay during it.  She wants law and order and to help the place that she came from , the middle class. She just had a 3.5 year apprenticeship from Biden, who was a public servant.  I'll take that any day over 'take the ship down with me before admitting I'm wrong.'
dyeus commented August 26
dyeus
dyeus
.Aug. 26

Trump visited a city nearby during the last presidential race, but stiffed them on the bill and it's now being handled by a collection agency for the city. He can't go back there to run, so he has to pick a different venue. Given the number of times he stiffed the bill I wonder how many times he has had to shift venues now. Character? Sure.
Christine commented August 26
C
Christine
AtlantaAug. 26

If anything can be called weak, it’s the argument put forth in this opinion. Kamala Harris has proven her strength over and over. From prosecutor to attorney general to senator to vice president. She has been on the campaign trail for all of three weeks, and already she has filled Democrats with hope and optimism. 

Meanwhile, Trump is trying to weasel out of his debate with Kamala Harris on ABC. That looks pretty weak to me.
Res'n:richbuyassetscheap commented August 26
R
Res'n:richbuyassetscheap
CalgaryAug. 26

@Jeninct 

I see this as another NYTimes article in a long line of articles trashing Democratic presidential candidates.
William commented August 26
W
William
MichiganAug. 26

Well, there goes my breakfast. 

Thanks, NYT, for running opinions that are grotesquely false, all in the attempt to be "balanced and fair." I'm looking forward to your opinion piece by Putin.
Floyd Kauffman commented August 26
F
Floyd Kauffman
MontanaAug. 26

Any cohort of Trump's is in one of 3 positions, pre-bus, under the bus or post-bus. To speak of him and character is just a bad joke.
Eoin Cahill commented August 26
E
Eoin Cahill
New YorkAug. 26

This idea that Kamala Harris won't "hold open town-hall events or... sit-down media interviews" is hilarious.  As long as Trump is demanding that she hold a press conference, she should avoid it.  Why let him dictate her media availability?
Richard Olmsted commented August 26
R
Richard Olmsted
OaklandAug. 26

Mr. Lowry thinks that Trump’s constant repetition of lies is some kind of genius rhetorical skill rather than a disqualifying character flaw.  Lowry wants to hold Harris to all the normal standards of honesty and decency but Trump’s just going to be Trump and win the “character” race?
Mary M. Roeser commented August 26
M
Mary M. Roeser
Omaha, NEAug. 26

What character?  The notion that Trump possesses character, integrity or ethics is a lunatic delusion.  He does not.  He has been a cheat and a liar since the moment he first drew breath.
He is a character. and not an uplifting one, either.  Because he is a character does not mean he possesses any.  You need to get that straight.
Frank Edwards commented August 26
F
Frank Edwards
Rochester, NYAug. 26

Character assassination through the repetition of statements taken out of context is as old as Rome. Nothing new here, Mr. Lowry. The Harris-Walz campaign, however, has far more ammunition in this regard and the discipline to deploy it more effectively.
Larry Loen commented August 26
L
Larry Loen
PhoenixAug. 26

Amazing that anyone take seriously the idea that Trump has "character".

And then proceeds to discuss it so we ignore the fact, among 100 others, that he cheated on his pregnant wife and then mightily tried to keep that (dare I say it?) character flaw from becoming public.

This is what conservatism is reduced to these days.
Amy R commented August 26
A
Amy R
ChicagoAug. 26

@Homeskillet my single issue is that this is my Roevember, as much as Republicans deny that no one is thinking about that as their top issue. I don’t even have a uterus anymore. This vote is for my daughter, and for every other person with a uterus who deserves the same bodily autonomy and reproductive freedom that I enjoyed.
Lyle Ross commented August 26
L
Lyle Ross
HoustonAug. 26

If you were to replace Harris With Trump in this essay, you'd be more accurate.  Trump isn't just weird, he's lost the popular vote twice and got smashed last go round.  The candidates he's backed have done spectacularly poorly.

Trump flips and flops on issues according to, well, pretty much how the wind blows but mostly on what rich guy last gave him money.  

If you're gonna write an essay on what will beat Harris, it shouldn't include issues where Trump is weaker.  Of the two of them, the one who is most likely to get those issues front and center in a cogent way is Harris.
steve commented August 26
s
steve
adirondacksAug. 26

Trump won in. 2016 by "drawing to an inside straight." Hillary was  a weak candidate that many voters disliked. In 2020 Trump lost to a weak candidate in a close election. Now Trump is an old man repeating the same tired routine as in 2016 and 2020 . The difference in 2024 will be a younger opponent  who relates to voters in a nonthreatening manner and is easy to like.
Michael commented August 26
M
Michael
CaliforniaAug. 26

Mr. Trump cannot win on character.  He is a multiply-convicted felon who was impeached twice, tried to overthrow a fair election, routinely denigrates his opponents, and is still facing numerous court cases (and jail time).  I cannot imagine why Mr. Lowry would make such a preposterous argument, unless it’s because he likes the huge tax cuts to the wealthy that Mr. Trump gave and promises to give more of if elected.
HemlockTrees commented August 26
H
HemlockTrees
western MassAug. 26

This is rich. Trump should win because he has character?
I honestly feel sorry for the right wing columnists who cannot make a sincere defense or argument for another Trump Presidency.
Joe From MN commented August 26
J
Joe From MN
MinnesotaAug. 26

Truly this is mere pablum. Trump best suited to be President? Where to start?

A man who bankrupted six times now wants control over the Federal Reserve? The Commander in Chief who denigrates soldiers and their families wants to be in charge again? The leader of the world's oldest Democracy who, rather than concede an obvious loss, fomented an armed insurrection?

The GOP needs to sit this one out, take a thorough review of the troops and select a path forward for 2028. Donald Trump is unfit to lead anything.
CV commented August 26
C
CV
NJ, USAAug. 26

@Peter J. Miller
I don’t see how political tactical advice for one particular candidate belongs in the opinion section of the New York Times. If this mainstream GOP pundit wants to advise the candidate, he should transmit that advice directly to the candidate. It does not concern a general readership.
Gary commented August 26
G
Gary
Broomfield, COAug. 26

Thanks for pointing out the obvious.  In typical national review style, you have failed Pronouns 101.  

To wit: Trump was too weak to win the popular vote in 2016 and 2020. He was too weak to keep from telling the MAGA crowd practically everything it wanted to hear when he ran in 2016 and 2020. He is too weak to hold open town-hall events or do extensive — or, at the moment, any — sit-down media interviews with a legitimate news organization.

He has jettisoned myriad positions since 2015 without explanation because he is a shape-shifting opportunist who can and will change on almost anything when politically convenient. Even if what he’s saying is moderate or popular, he can’t be trusted to hold to it once he’s in office.

He didn’t do more as President to secure the border or to address inflation because he didn’t care enough about the consequences for ordinary people. He doesn’t care if his tax policies destroyed jobs. He has been part of an administration that has seen real wages stagnate while minimizing the problem because the party line matters to him more than economic reality for working Americans.

You get the point.
Ann commented August 26
A
Ann
BostonAug. 26

@Ed 
Well, as far as I know she pays her bills, has no criminal record, and has not sexually assaulted anyone, and does not mock war heroes.  And she does not pretend to knowledge she does not have.
And she does not suck up to dictators.  

Just as a start.
Millie commented August 26
M
Millie
NYCAug. 26

It would be something to criticize if it were true that Harris is "too" this or "too" that, but the examples put forth in this piece start out with untruths, to begin with.
And when it comes to "character," there's simply no contest.
Harris for the win. She's "too" perfect for the presidency, right now, at this time. And the GOP knows it, perfectly well.
Gordon commented August 26
G
Gordon
New JerseyAug. 26

If this is the most credible voice the NYTimes can find to present a "balanced" opinion on Trump's fitness for office, then I have great hopes for the outcome of the election.
emily commented August 26
e
emily
MAAug. 26

Well that was a painful read. Thank the Lord for modern pharma's meds controlling blood pressure. 

Mr. Lowry suggests Trump can win by "crafting a comprehensive anti-Harris argument that implicates, in turn, her suitability for the highest office in the land" - referring to a woman with biography as a public servant that includes a stint as San Fran DA, as the AG for the nation's largest state, as a US Senator, and as Vice President of the United States. Quite the resume! 

One can question her policies, but in a healthy political environment characterized by sobriety and a concern for the common good, suitability would be an unassailable given. 

On the other hand, consider this question:

An applicant for a job has 34 felony convictions for criminal fraud, one conviction for slander that cost the perp over 90 million dollars in damages (predicated on a finding of sexual assault by a jury), one conviction for business fraud with a judgment of over 500 million including partial liquidation of assets, one 25 million dollar settlement for a phony college scam, and several indictments with trial dates pending for espionage, obstruction of justice, and insurrection adjacent crimes, the latter costing lives as well as property damage in the millions. 

And that's the short list! 

Would you hire said applicant for a job at Burger King? At a bank? At a school?  For a government job - county, state or federal?

Would you hire said applicant for any job?
Sparky commented August 26
S
Sparky
NYCAug. 26

Trump is almost certainly the worst American who has ever lived. To suggest he can win on character is beyond perverse.
annabellina commented August 26
a
annabellina
VermontAug. 26

Very funny. Harris didn't run in the 2024 primary so obviously, she didn't win. Trump didn't win in 2020; people he endorsed lost in droves in 2022. This is no argument.
It amazes me how far some people will reach to find a lifeline. Attacking as weak the poised prosecutor who faced down Bill Barr and Bret Kavanaugh in Senate hearings, who is not fazed by major events on which her future depends, is a feeble argument. Americans will believe their eyes; they'll get a chance in the debate to see who is strong and who is weak. I'm betting on Kamala to prevail. She's doing her media events on her own schedule, not on the National Review's.
RC commented August 26
R
RC
Santa FeAug. 26

This column is basically hilarious.  Rich Lowry...oh my.  Now, I will give credit for his thesis that focusing on a very narrow band relative to his opponent is decent advice with a good track record in campaign battles.  But to make that issue "character", when the party  in question (Trump) wielding that rhetorical cudgel, is the worst example of "character" in recent political memory, is itself, absurd.  But that absurd gaslighting also fits the GOP at this point--double down, project, lie.  My favorite here is near the ending where Rich lauds the Trump team for holding smaller, issue focused events (instead of the German 1933 style rallies). They are smaller events because the Trump crowd is bored with the Trump act; and at these "issue focused" events, Trump is recorder as constantly and continuously being off topic (and off the rails) as he moves on the pressing issues like sharks and Hannibal Lecter, etc.  Really Rich, you should be embarrassed by the obsequiousness of it all.  But we in the sane world have learned since 2016 that the right is embarrassed by nothing (except losing, maybe).
John Lindermuth commented August 26
J
John Lindermuth
PennsylvaniaAug. 26

I doubt anyone who ever ran for president had a less worthy character than Trump. Good grief. You might as well suggest he run on a platform of honesty.
Mark commented August 26
M
Mark
NYCAug. 26

Wow! This is DUMB. If Harris is weak and Trump is strong, please give us weak. If she doesn't care about ordinary people and he does - wait, let me stop laughing. I agree that campaigns can turn these kinds of obvious lies into truths through endless repetition, but Lowry's straight-faced cynicism in advocating this approach is appalling.
Sam commented August 26
S
Sam
BostonAug. 26

I remember the Bush campaign’s attacks on Kerry as a flip-flopper, Mr. Lowry. And it seems you would indeed know something about flip-flopping: Here you are writing a column helping Trump — as a representative of what was once the most prominent Never-Trump publication in the conservative ecosystem. A pretty delicious irony.
A Texan in Vermont commented August 26
A
A Texan in Vermont
Green MountainsAug. 26

“Ms. Harris was too weak to win the Democratic primary this year”? C’mon, man, give me a break. This interpretation is so out of context, it’s absurd. There are legitimate criticisms to be made, but any argument that distorts the truth this tendentiously is not worthy of a serious response.
Nikolai commented August 26
N
Nikolai
GogolAug. 26

Turns out Trump was right about something (and only that one thing) -- the NY Times really is "failing". I'd say "consider this dumb nonsense my last straw" but that actually came months ago and I'll be canceling my subscription the day after the next presidential inauguration. Being informed is important, but at this point giving a few less dollars to the purveyors of this both-sides garbage is pretty crucial too.
Retired Fed commented August 26
R
Retired Fed
Northern WestchesterAug. 26

"Flip-flopping" is a derogatory term used to describe what is actually a perfectly legitimate and understandable change of position, which in turn is based on changes on the supporting or underlying components or conditions of what defined that position in the first place.  For instance- what made perfect sense five years ago may not make as much sense now due to changes in the economy or demographics.
David commented August 26
D
David
PAug. 26

Is this a parody piece like the Larry David one about "after birth abortions"???

Sure sounds like it.

Rich Lowry is deeply confused. 

It is NOT Kamala Harris, but DONALD TRUMP that IN FACT has to be connected to the deeper case that he is weak, a phony, and doesn’t truly care about the country or the middle class.
SB commented August 26
S
SB
vtAug. 26

Lowry seems to be following Trump's playbook:  keep repeating inaccurate "facts" and assume people will believe him.
Geoff commented August 26
G
Geoff
ParisAug. 26

The man is lazy.  He prefers to golf or rant in front of cable news then govern.  The man is crooked.  Convicted in civil court of fraud several times.  And now a bona fide felon.  The man is a traitor to American values and norms.  He cozies up to dictators in spite of what his experts tell him.  He would like to "suspend" the constitution to suit his needs in case of an electoral loss.  The man is old.  The man is dumb (just listen to him trying to make logical sentance).  The man is a bigot.  The man has not principles or morals.  He's a sham.  An egomaniac.  
Now that's character you could run on !
Neetz commented August 26
N
Neetz
NYCAug. 26

This has to be the funniest comment of a title ever.  as if DT has any character whatsoever, other than a cartoon character.  give me a break!
Kristin Urbinati commented August 26
K
Kristin Urbinati
Chapel Hill NCAug. 26

To hear' Trump' and 'character' used in the same sentence is laughable.   I continue to ask why he gets a pass by journalists and for Harris the bar is held much higher.
Cunningham commented August 26
Cunningham
Cunningham
Woodbury, CTAug. 26

@Louis true enough!  Being a character and having character are two very different things. Trump has the former in spades, but none of the latter.
Scratching commented August 26
Scratching
Scratching
USAug. 26

By any standard metric of suitability for office, character or experience -regardless of trump's time in office- Harris outperforms or exceeds the felonious former president.
She is more honest, stable, likeable, decent, intelligent than trump, and has spent more time serving in elected office. And, of course, she hasn't been charged or convicted of any crimes.
Michael commented August 26
M
Michael
ORAug. 26

@Robert I agree, but believe it's worth pointing out that this piece is not exactly just "the media." It is a guest essay in the opinion section, written by the chief editor of a conservative publication. That is to say, it is written by one of Trump's political allies.
John Newhouse commented August 26
J
John Newhouse
Long Island NYAug. 26

An election based on (as Mr. Lowry contends) "is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans" does not favor Trump. 

Even his own supporters know that Trump lies more than any President or presidential candidate in history.

The Harris campaign has focused on middle class values and middle class economic advancement. Trump has touted more tax cuts to the wealthy and tariffs that will crush the middle class and raise costs for everyone.

Lastly any President that refuses to accept a peaceful transfer of power when they lose is not qualified.
A Blinkin commented August 26
A
A Blinkin
ChicagoAug. 26

Rich Lowry has been a prominent voice for decades now -- decades most notable for the fact that he's never actually been right about anything
MXMitchell commented August 26
M
MXMitchell
NYAug. 26

Trump voters have been duped into thinking the 2020 election was stolen without a shred of evidence. Most humans are loathe to admit they've been wrong. Trump supporters are so invested in him, he could say Harris was born on Mars and they would believe him.
SAO commented August 26
S
SAO
MaineAug. 26

And on the same page, there's a piece about the black hole in the middle of GOP campaign finance, saying,"Federal Election Commission campaign disclosure reports from 2020 show that much of the money donated to the Trump campaign went into a legal and financial black hole reportedly controlled by Trump family members and close associates. This year’s campaign disclosures are shaping up to be the same."

But *Trump* is the candidate who can win on character?
Jack commented August 26
Jack
Jack
AshevilleAug. 26

Character assassination is a tried and true political campaign strategy, and Trump is a master of the art.  No doubt we'll see lots of disparaging remarks about Kamala Harris that will be red meat for his faithful horde.  Will they convince some to stay with Trump or abandon Harris?  People will first have to ignore the real threats to their safety and well being that a Trump presidency would bring with it; Project 2025, healthcare, NATO alliance, Ukraine, China, Russia, climate change, LGBTQ civil rights, national abortion bans, and myriad others that promise to upend countless lives and fan the flames of our divisions and hatreds.
Nils Engell commented August 26
N
Nils Engell
TorontoAug. 26

Rich cites Trump's "build that wall and have Mexico pay for it."  and "crooked Hillary" as an example of effective repetition as a political strategy. Two completely dishonest and in the case of the former obviously laughable taglines. Is Rich arguing that Trump could win this race on character by further leaning into his lies and projection but simply focusing on a narrow range of dishonest attacks? Always insightful to see what the conservative intellectuals at the National Review are coming up with these days.
Kathy B. commented August 26
K
Kathy B.
Northern VirginiaAug. 26

the headline of this piece made me laugh out loud... that's really rich, Rich, to advise Trump on how he can beat Kamala at being more presidential, more leaderly, more strategic. GOOD LUCK WITH THAT.
Gavin Scott commented August 26
G
Gavin Scott
AustraliaAug. 26

Character? Trump? The US media is in a Stockholm syndrome like symbiotic relationship with one of the most flawed humans on the planet. You’re all as sick as each other, whatever the rationale.
Thomas commented August 26
T
Thomas
MadisonAug. 26

Describing her as opportunist became useless the minute JD Vance was chosen as VP candidate
TDDonly commented August 26
T
TDDonly
FloridaAug. 26

@Greenie 
There was no need for a primary at the time.  The sitting President was seeking re-election.  He then chose to withdraw from consideration for the nomination after the primaries but before the official nomination was made.  Harris was nominated by the standard, long-standing processes.  There is absolutely nothing wrong with the way Harris was chosen as the nominee, and the only people who seem to have a problem with it are disingenuous MAGA-heads.
Dazed and Confused commented August 26
D
Dazed and Confused
EarthAug. 26

@newyorkjoe that. And also that whole Covid thing.

Lest we forget.
JT commented August 26
J
JT
NMAug. 26

Trump literally tried to overthrow the legal government of the United States and sexually assaulted a woman.

No reasonable, informed and patriotic American wants a person of such low moral character to be within a thousand miles of the White House.
Mike commented August 26
M
Mike
Roswell, GAAug. 26

I wonder what substances Rich Lowry took before writing this piece.   If he is reading it today while clearheaded, he may ask for it to be retracted.  One of the few consistent things about Donald Trump is that his position changes constantly to match that of the last person that he talked to, and it has been documented a number of times. 

Trump has been pandering to whatever special interest group he has been speaking in front of since 2015, and his positions on major issues like abortion or his team's Project 2025 blueprint have turned on a dime when they prove to be unpopular.    Trump's primary concern is staying out of jail, followed by continuing his grift and control of the GOP money machine.   Other than that, he is perfectly malleable and willing to say, do or try anything that will please his audience on any given day.   Stopping taxes on tips is a perfect example, which is an idiotic economic policy and would hasten the demise of social security and Medicare.

Trump may actually believe that his tax cuts paid for themselves, even though they clearly just blew a hole in the budget.   He may also believe that tariffs don't get passed along to the consumer in the form of higher prices.  And he may believe that isolationism is the best foreign policy in a world that is more integrated than at any time in history.  But he would be wrong on all counts, just as he is the wrong person to lead the country going forward.
Jack commented August 26
J
Jack
St Petersburg FLAug. 26

Surely this is satire. Trump has no character, he is a character.
Richard commented August 26
R
Richard
North CarolinaAug. 26

As stated in a previous comment, Trump is a character, but he has none of the qualities of character.  I think the main question, aside from any of this character discussion and Lowry's backhanded recommendation, is to reflect on the Jan. 6 event.  How can anyone support a "character" who staged, encouraged, and has basically promised a repeat of this again?
TyroneShoelaces commented August 26
TyroneShoelaces
TyroneShoelaces
Hillsboro, OregonAug. 26

In my world and I'm sure in many others, the terms "Trump" and "character" are mutually exclusive.
Fidelio commented August 26
F
Fidelio
Chapel Hill, NCAug. 26

“One of his talents as a communicator is sheer repetition, which, when he’s on to something that works, attains a certain power.”

Yes, the technique is known as the Big Lie, and Trump has shown himself an adept student of the 20th-century totalitarians who first deployed it. All politicians are, to varying degrees, shapeshifters, but we’ve been lucky that the few who are demagogues haven’t gotten very far, Trump being the great exception. Lowry’s proposal that we frame this election as a contest of character is another sign, if we needed one, of the utter cynicism that has consumed the Republican Party.
Terri McLemore commented August 26
T
Terri McLemore
St. Petersburg, Fl.Aug. 26

@observer Absolutely!   More than once lately I've realized that the late Eugene Patterson, Ben Bradlee, Katherine Graham-bulwarks of necessary truths-must be rolling over at how today's NYT, WaPo strain to play the fair and balanced, false equivalency game.   This is a man of no character.  A man who incited an insurrection, continues to claim that the 2020 election was stolen, refuses to say whether he will accept the outcome of the 2024 election (spoiler alert-unless he wins, he won't), lies with such impunity fact checking is almost useless.   
As testified to by people who were actually in his administration, the word "character" is not the first word that comes to mind when describing Donald Trump.
Giving voice to dissenting opinions is part of the editorial process.  I get that.  But giving voice to someone who clearly thinks a man of no character can win an election by winning the character argument is laughable, and well beneath the NYT.
mike commented August 26
m
mike
upstateAug. 26

For Trump to win anything on the basis of character is the most preposterous thing I've heard in years.
leave_it_to_me commented August 26
l
leave_it_to_me
FloridaAug. 26

Read the other article in this paper about the 87 year old woman in Texas that had her home raided at 6am. That is how Trump people are trying to win, with fear, intimidation, and threats of violence. They are using law enforcement to do it and under Trump will use the military against us. They've put it in writing! This is not a debate about policy and the economy, people. This is about a police state that the GOP has desired for decades. I have always had respect for law enforcement and our military but the GOP wants to convert them into their private army. I repeat, read the article about the 87 year old woman.
Trillest commented August 26
T
Trillest
Seattle, WAAug. 26

Wait. This is satire, right, like Jonathan Swift, or Sinclair Lewis, or Percival Everett? Because if the author is serious about pitting the character of a man convicted of sexual abuse, 34 felony counts, is now claiming that his administration will be good for women and their reproductive rights after bragging that he “terminated” those rights, stole the nation’s most secret and sensitive documents and kept them in his bathroom, and sent a violent mob to the nation’s capital to overthrow a free and fair election against a woman who has done none of these things and is seeking to prevent this man from ever stepping foot in the White House again, then the author is in fact unserious and this opinion piece should be given what it was unintentionally written to give: doubled over, side gripping, tear streaming, laughter. 
Except it’s not funny. Because adults are trying to save this democracy.
John Lee Pettimore commented August 26
J
John Lee Pettimore
ClevelandAug. 26

@AACNY If I were a Trump fan I wouldn't mention lies.
 
And is failing to sit for an interview the best you have? I think that pales in comparison to Jan. 6, 2021.
Forge Pigeon commented August 26
F
Forge Pigeon
CaliforniaAug. 26

"Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life, but the attributes that play into the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency — is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans?"  
-Rich Lowry

"Good leaders cultivate honest speech;
they love advisors who tell them the truth.
An intemperate leader wreaks havoc in lives;
you’re smart to stay clear of someone like that.
Good-tempered leaders invigorate lives;
they’re like spring rain and sunshine."  Proverbs 16:13-15 
-The Bible

Harris/Walz win.
PhillySub commented August 26
P
PhillySub
USAAug. 26

@Homeskillet - It is definitely not amnesia concerning 1/6. It is gaslighting. It isn't as if Republicans have forgotten 1/6, it is worse as it is their remorse that it wasn't successful. It is their "Lost Cause." Just like Confederate sympathizers can't believe the South lost the war and to this day their present day advocates promulgate the Big Lie that the war was about "states rights" and not slavery just to justify slavery, today's Republicans justify 1/6 on the Big Lie that Trump actually won the election and that 1/6 was "legitimate political discourse."
Banty commented August 26
Banty
Banty
Buffalo NYAug. 26

Lots of problems with this essay.

Setting aside the morally ambiguous, to say the least, statement that character does not involve personal conduct, every line of attack Lowry suggests, is one that Trump himself would be subject to.  And straightforwardly, without the awkward turnaboutism that the GOP so often resorts to.

Trump has been a shape shifter regarding several issues, especially, abortion.  Harris's reaching for progressive voters in 2020 pales next to Trump's contributions to Dem candidates - including - Harris.

The Harris campaign care in defining her and caution regarding interviews, pales next to Trump's refusal to debate his primary opponents and hestitation-dancing regarding debating - Harris herself.

The "why didn't she as a VP" stuff is easily cast as talking points against a person in a position with few actual Constitutional responsibilities.  Against Trump's failure as *President* to, for example, actually pass infrastructure legislation despite the oft-promised "infrastructure week", it's extremely weak sauce.

Finally, Lowry's main message "The scattershot Trump attacks on Harris need to be refocused on these character attributes." is absolutely silly when he himself, in this essay, acknowledges Trump's inability to focus on - anything.  And that, that itself, has illustrated his unfitness, in Lowry's casting - character - to be President.
csiedor commented August 26
c
csiedor
AtlantaAug. 26

Of the ten thousand things to write about, you chose to give aid to the enemy, the worst president in our history? Really, you want him back? 

OK but if he wins, a piece of the blame, admittedly small, but it will belong to you.
T e r i commented August 26
T
T e r i
EarthAug. 26

@Rob 

Yes, the electoral college and gerrymandering are major obstacles in swing and red states. As are all the Republican-empowering third party voters.

At the same time, our overall turnout in elections is abysmal. Only 59% of eligible Americans showed up in 2016, enthroning Trump and his planetary wrecking crew; only 68% in 2020, electing Biden but tying his hands behind his back with a 50/50 Senate that included 1 Democrat from a deep Red state; and only 45% in 2022, turning our House and the livability of our Home over to Republican climate deniers and obstructionists. That’s an F+, a D+ and an F- in wielding the political power we have to protect and defend our Living World and our children’s futures.

The good news is that there’s a ton of room for improvement. If those of us who care about All of Life and our Democratic Republic would choose to show up in droves, there’s a very good chance we can overwhelm the obstacles and win strong enough majorities in the House and Senate to empower a Democratic President.

It’s up to each and every one of us to try.

Love = Action
Chris Croom commented August 26
C
Chris Croom
San DiegoAug. 26

Dear NYTimes, 

(No one will think this paper is centrist even if you print a playbook the Trump campaign would be wise to use.)

As for Lowry's screed, sure Harris is flawed. But comparing her flaws to Trump's creates a yawning chasm and makes it feel like a comparison between side effects of the coronavirus vaccine and the huge percentages of actual harm you are likely to experience if you get coronavirus.

Any writer this obsessed with a candidate's "strength," is sexist and authoritarian. I'm much more interested in the piece in this newspaper about how "strength" voters are always more authoritarian around the edges and support democracies falling into dictatorships all around the world. I'm also interested in the proportion of gamers that care mostly about this quality in their leaders.

I am DEFINITELY not interested in reading editorials in the pages of the NYTimes that could help the Trump campaign, but it is super on-brand for you to print anything that could possibly hurt Democrats. Who, exactly, is your audience?
Johnathan McDonald commented August 26
J
Johnathan McDonald
Lower Sackville, NSAug. 26

This column, in my view, is much like the body of work from, say, Ann Coulter. It is not serious, but provocative and inflammatory, designed to rile emotion as opposed to present valid ideas.
Nash Reiter commented August 26
N
Nash Reiter
ChicagoAug. 26

Harris is so much more qualified to be President than Trump. January 6th disqualified him. No one who did that should even be running for President.
JA commented August 26
J
JA
GaAug. 26

Don't know what you've been smoking but trump is devoid of all redeeming character qualities or traits as described; qualified, trustworthy and strong, & does he care about average Americans? Never has never will. This article is right about one thing, Kamala is going to decimate him at the debate - without a teleprompter all he'll be able to spew is buzz words with no substance
Nan Socolow commented August 26
Nan Socolow
Nan Socolow
West Palm Beach, FLAug. 26

The 45th president has told all of us for too many years that he's entitled to make personal attacks against any candidate running for any office.  He repeats memes constantly. "We will build the wall and Mexico will pay for it!".   Trump's MAGA followers, election-deniers as he is, are eager to overturn our democracy.
Donald Trump never had the character to become our President.  Vice-President Kamala Harris, a woman of character, will become our 47th President in 3 months.
David Stowe commented August 26
D
David Stowe
East Lansing, MIAug. 26

When I saw this headline I was sure this was a satire (though fairly heavy-handed) by someone like Andy Borowitz or Paul Rudnick. In the age of Trump satire has become nearly impossible.
L commented August 26
L
L
earthAug. 26

It's amazing, that Lowry somehow didn't think to mention a violent overthrow of the US government! 
Kind of relevant to character!
Brad Martin commented August 26
B
Brad Martin
Eastern NCAug. 26

Lowry is absolutely right that character plays far more than issues in Presidential campaigns, which is a good reason for the Harris campaign to not get too stuck in the thicket of specifics. 

But I question the premise that she's all that vulnerable on being weak.  She changes her mind.  Sane people do exactly that in the face of changed circumstances. She got to this nomination because the incumbent left the race.  OK, she was right there with the incumbent and when the responsibility fell to her, she responded energetically and effectively. The advice she's getting to change seems ill advised. If she wants to convey strong character, she should just be who she is.

Turning the column on its head, Trump is screamingly vulnerable on issues of character.  Part of Biden's weakness is that all he could do is shout that Trump is bad.  Harris likely has the instincts and capability to conclusively show voters that he really is bad.
Gary B commented August 26
G
Gary B
MassachusettsAug. 26

I was struck by how many of the character flaws ascribed to VP Harris are more strongly evident in Trump.  Why not call out your own presidential nominee for these egregious and disqualifying flaws?

Comparing the two, VP Harris’ flaws are like wrinkles on a 40 year old face while Trumps are like the Grand Canyon.
Christopher Robin Jepson commented August 26
C
Christopher Robin Jepson
FloridaAug. 26

You've got to be kidding.

He is a joke, an embarrassment to America. 

Mr. Lowry writes, "Presidential races are won and lost on character."

Trump is a character alright.  A despicable one.

Nuf sed.
John commented August 26
J
John
Washington StateAug. 26

When Trump praised Kennedy for endorsing him, one station played a recording of how Trump described Kennedy earlier this year. All the Harris campaign has to do is remind people how Trump lacks any convictions and says whatever he thinks will make the sale.
Boosey commented August 26
B
Boosey
Bucks CountyAug. 26

This was very helpful to read.  it once again enforces the ability of Trump supporters to twist themselves into knots to justify their candidate's suitability for office.  However, i still cannot figure out the hold he has on so many people both in the elected world (hey, lindsey...), people of "faith", women (why would anyone believe he believes in reproductive rights) etc. Even his VP choice bought it lock,stock and barrel (clearly a self serving decision).   It was absolutely laughable to hear Vance say that he thought Trump would veto a national abortion ban if passed.  We all know Trump will sign it in a flash and then brag about it.  
Trump has shown us who he is for years... not sure why anyone thinks he will change or wants to change into a decent human being.
Choosing to not vote in November, sends no message other than bringing Trump closer to reelection.  VOTE BLUE.
jrk commented August 26
j
jrk
new yorkAug. 26

Mr. Lowry has been an apologist for just about anything a Republican will do. Character doesn't make fun of the disabled, doesn't sexually abuse women (he admits to it), doesn't stiff people who work for them and character doesn't encourage an attempt to overthrow a legal election. 
Maybe that's why the latest endorsement makes so much sense - brain injured drug addict endorses rapist for President. At least RFK had that excuse Mr. Lowry. What's yours?
Jarrell commented August 26
J
Jarrell
ChicagoAug. 26

Clearly if one has enough make-up at hand and have abandoned reality one can make a person who attempted to end the Republic a viable candidate for the Presidency.
Tom Robinson commented August 26
T
Tom Robinson
BuffaloAug. 26

@Dan in all seriousness can you give an example of a defined policy? He just says he’ll fix it or it will be the best.
Reason commented August 26
R
Reason
Stoughton MaAug. 26

"Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life"? What strange dance is the author doing with this statement? Trump being Trump should clearly display his character for all to see (and to disapprove). Character, as someone has said, is destiny. His destiny will not be the White House in 2024 due mostly to his "character".
Brooklyncowgirl commented August 26
B
Brooklyncowgirl
Down In the Pines Of JerseyAug. 26

@Robert 

“ What bothers me is that Trump is normalized now, and the media treats him as a normal candidate seeing the highest office, as if he is qualified and ready. ”

Like it or not, Trump is a known quantity.  He has won the hearts of large numbers of Americans many of whom would crawl over broken glass to vote for him.  Many more are dubious about his personal character but give him high marks for strength and above all his business acumen.  

These perceptions, however erroneous is reality.

In order to beat him Kamala Harris is going to have to show that she has strength of her own.  She has to show people who do not like Trump but who are wary of what she might become because of her past, that she is the genuine article.

The best way to do this is to do it personally in multiple unscripted interviews and town halls.  She should also go into the lion’s den—Fox News—and speak directly to reluctant Trump voters.

In an election where she will have to not only win but win overwhelmingly, playing it safe is not an option.
The R Bar E Brand commented August 26
T
The R Bar E Brand
American WestAug. 26

@Prudent Realist 

Most voters have already made up their minds. Victory will go to the candidate who can persuade undecided voters.

 Kamala has to do two impossible things: 1) reach undecided voters who don't want to be reached and 2) convince cynical voters she's not a cynical politician.
KL commented August 26
K
KL
PhiladelphiaAug. 26

"Presidential races are won and lost on character as much as the issues, and often the issues are proxies for character. Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life, but the attributes that play into the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency — is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans?"

This must be satire because I cannot fathom any human being with a shred of dignity or an ounce of sense making this argument in favor of Trump.
Tarek commented August 26
T
Tarek
Minneapolis, MNAug. 26

Character? Trump is literally everything I teach my children not to be.
Sam commented August 26
S
Sam
ChicagoAug. 26

What a strange op-ed. I couldn't tell if it was intended to be a warning that the race is close and Trump could "win on character," or a suggestion that the GOP let Trump be Trump. As an argument for Trump's character, well there wasn't one at all. 

Perhaps Mr. Lowry has skills outside of writing.
Oldman commented August 26
O
Oldman
NorthWoodsAug. 26

What does it say about Republicans when they assert that a guy who, as President of the United States, mean tweets a 16 year old girl in a fit of spite, can win on the character issue? 

Guess this is all part of the redefinition they are attempting, beginning with calling the J6 insurrectionists "patriots".
Midwest commented August 26
M
Midwest
ChicagoAug. 26

Consider the source. Here's a quote from Rich Lowry: 

"I'm sure I'm not the only male in America who, when [Sarah] Palin dropped her first wink, sat up a little straighter on the couch and said, "Hey, I think she just winked at me." And her smile. By the end, when she clearly knew she was doing well, it was so sparkling it was almost mesmerizing. It sent little starbursts through the screen and ricocheting around the living rooms of America. This is a quality that can't be learned; it's either something you have or you don't, and man, she's got it."
Jimarko commented August 26
J
Jimarko
Close to New HavenAug. 26

“…perhaps as they hustle down a corridor of the U.S. Capitol.”  Yes.  Trying to avoid the next group of insurrections intent on putting the strong man’s big lie into action — again assaulting law officers and offering to hang elected officials. If that is “normal” to you, then spin your opinions on Maduro and Putin and leave us holding on to the fabric of our thinning democracy as we keep it out of the hands of MAGA.
JF commented August 26
J
JF
MassachusettsAug. 26

Your argument is what is weak. As well as the person you expect to execute the strategy. 
Harris is VICE President. What policies exactly did Pence lead in his time as VP? Vice Presidents do not have much in the way of authority. They are a person in the room. Period. And they can break a tie in the Senate, which has been critical in Biden’s term. 
And before you start playing the flip-flop argument too hard, take a quick look at Mr. Vance’s history. Harris has evolved in her positions over time as should be expected with experience.  Vance has been a complete demo and rebuild.
GD commented August 26
G
GD
NHAug. 26

This was satire, right? Trump is the last person on earth who can win on character. Whatever Kamala Harris’s shortcomings might be, she has the character to be President. Trump is a cartoon character - a badly drawn one at that.
Ron commented August 26
R
Ron
MinnesotaAug. 26

What a great click-bait headline. I couldn't resist taking a look to see how someone could argue Trump can win on character. It turns out, Lowery isn't talking about Trump winning by convincing anyone he's a man of good character. Rather the strategy is more of the same Trumpism: demeaning the opponent, tearing down the opponent, working to find some "verbal hiccup" they can use to batter the opponent with, repeating it 50 times a day. Sadly, Lowery is correct that Trump could win on "character" this way. He's done it before.
TA commented August 26
TA
TA
Rhode IslandAug. 26

I was not expecting Mr Lowery’s reasoning but agree 45’s strategy of repeating the same lies until they become “true” to his disciples, has worked in the past. 

What the writer forgot to mentioned is that 45 has had six corporate bankruptcies and has a history of unpaid bills and lawsuits that spans decades. He has been involved in numerous lawsuits over issues of breach of contract, defamation, and fraud. His legal battles extend to personal, business, and political arenas. Examples include lawsuits from contractors who worked on his casinos in Atlantic City and various real estate projects, as well as legal issues related to Trump University, which ended in a $25 million settlement over allegations of fraud. Recently, there was a report alleging he took $10M from the Egyptians. These facts (and allege detail) are also a testament to 45’s character. 

Conversely, Kamala Harris has degrees in economics and political science, earned her Juris Doctor (JD) degree in 1989, and was a successful prosecutor in CA. These details are also a testament to HER character.
cowalker commented August 26
c
cowalker
OhioAug. 26

We saw how Trump handled an emergency with the COVID-19 pandemic. He ignored reality because he thought his job was be a "cheerleader." Then he couldn't decide who to listen to--experienced healthcare experts or weirdos popular with his MAGA base. So he wavered and wandered, never inspiring comfidence in his leadership and missing thousands of opportunities to save lives. When he lost the election he fomented violence in an attempt to remain in office--the only U.S. President to do so. What kind of character do those behaviors indicate? There are few people  in this country who are less presidential in character than Trump. I can't believe anyone of any intelligence would want to give him another chance to create chaos and destroy our environment.
George T. commented August 26
George T.
George T.
Portland, OregonAug. 26

The guy who in 2016 released an NR issue titled "Against Trump" now argues for Trump's character. 
It is true that everything Trump touches dies - in this case - what's left of Rich Lowry's reputation as a "serious" conservative.
Dnie commented August 26
D
Dnie
ILAug. 26

Talk about a flip-flop.  First Donald proclaims victory on packing the court to stop abortions, now he has reversed his position: saying he would be “great for women and their reproductive rights”  He has no moral compass, his positions are staked on what serves his own self interests, not landing in jail is one of them.
Lemmy commented August 26
L
Lemmy
UKAug. 26

I am assuming this is a satire as no reasonable right thinking human being would have character and Donald Trump in the same sentence on a positive note.
Ellen commented August 26
E
Ellen
Gainesville, GeorgiaAug. 26

This article is not about Trump’s real character and its myriad shortcomings and flaws. It is about “perceived” character by voters and how Trump can exploit and also is exploiting already the “perceived” character of Kamala Harris as weak. In the past it has often been a mistake to count out Trump. He has an uncanny ability to make “stuff stick” by endless repetition. Hopefully the Harris campaign is working on a strategy that will outmaneuver Trump. Our first glimpse of that will be the promised press interview at the end of this month.
Lokrizen commented August 26
L
Lokrizen
San DiegoAug. 26

Author is speaking of character and Trump? How does an educated person think a convicted fraudster, feminist and sexual predator has a chance to win on character? What am I missing here? A serial liar who is devoted to his own gains with zero respect for truth and honesty ? Who tried to overturn a legitimate election violently? Who surrounds himself with the sycophants du jour - see RFK Jr.? Who has draconian views of diversity and progress? Somebody please explain to him what’s really going on. These MAGA proponents scare me. He should know better.
Jon commented August 26
J
Jon
NYCAug. 26

I do not understand why anyone would choose autocracy over democracy. This really boggles my mind.
mother of two commented August 26
m
mother of two
ilAug. 26

Mr. Lowry, what kind of person are you?  Even as editor of the National Review, this piece descends to Trump's basest floor of  un-truth.  As Trump's former press secretary recently said, Trump said you can get away with saying anything if you repeat it over and over--truth be darned.  "Weak" is his repeat word against Harris?  Two can play that game, sir, and Democrats have plenty of words to repeat--and theirs are both powerful and TRUE: "felon". "sexual abuse", "fraudster".  You are grasping at straws; we can see now that Trump is terrified to debate a former prosecutor who isn't afraid of him, unlike her former GOP Congressional colleagues all of whom play duck-and-cover from his attacks on weaklings.

Back under your rock, Mr. Lowry. Do you imagine that Project 2025 won't become the albatross tied around Trump's neck?  Do you imagine so many Americans are asleep to the dangers that he and you pose to this nation?  If we are and he somehow wins, then as Franklin cautioned, maybe we don't any longer deserve a republic because it will be dispatched.

NYTimes, what are you thinking publishing this nonsense?
John Wheelwright commented August 26
J
John Wheelwright
CanadaAug. 26

How Trump scores on the 'character' chart is perfectly obvious to anyone paying the slightest attention to him.  Simply put, he doesn't have any.
MtnFrost commented August 26
M
MtnFrost
Boulder COAug. 26

@The R Bar E Brand VP Harris doesn't have to do anything other than continue to campaign.  It was always going to be a republican slaughter this fall, and now that age and energy have been taken off the board, it's going to be a glorious election night for Americans and the Democratic party who represents them.
omartraore commented August 26
o
omartraore
Heppner, ORAug. 26

Five more possible article themes Mr. Lowry might consider:

1. If the industrialized world exhausts its fossil fuel supply, we can finally begin addressing the hoax of climate change;
2. The only way to truly make US streets and homes safer is to provide every family with an AR-15;
3. Universal marriage, not health care, would end poverty;
4. Clarence Thomas is a misunderstood hero to the downtrodden billionaire class;
5. Wealth inequality is the cornerstone of American exceptionalism.
Bonus theme: The white ruling class must push back against the oppression of the woke mob (although he's likely already crafted several versions of this one).
Emily commented August 26
E
Emily
MassachusettsAug. 26

"Mr. Trump doesn’t need much convincing to launch personal attacks. He said earlier this month that he feels “entitled” to them. "

Entitled is a good self-description for Trump. 

As if entitlement is his whole goal, regardless of everyone he manages to shove off HIS stage.
Exb commented August 26
E
Exb
MarylandAug. 26

What a deceptive headline and a cynical op-ed. The article is about how Trump could win by attacking Harris's character not how he could win based on his own character. Nor apparently do the attacks on her character have to be true, just constantly repeated.
R. Law commented August 26
R
R. Law
TexasAug. 26

@Prudent Realist - Indeed; the flaw in Lowry's logic is that Donald 45** has a track record, and is not some unknown quantity who can run as an outsider. Unless the media lets him. Where are the tax returns he promised so many many long years ago? What about the verified multiple tens of thousands of lies he told the American people? Yeah, character counts.
Marli commented August 26
M
Marli
BostonAug. 26

This is intended as humor, right?
ABG commented August 26
A
ABG
PennsylvaniaAug. 26

It is laughable to think this could be a viable strategy coming from someone who literally only cares about himself. Trump didn't even care enough about his voters to show up for a single primary debate.
David commented August 26
D
David
YonkersAug. 26

Hey Rich, have you seen Trump’s latest statement that he’s now fighting for “women’s reproductive rights”. Where does that factor into your assessment of “character”? Good lord, to write an entire nyt article arguing about Harris’s apparent lack of character was certainly bold and a radical thesis, and yet I still think you’re really joking. You’re putting us on. You really can’t be that serious.
JBN RN commented August 26
JBN RN
JBN RN
Park City, UtahAug. 26

Well, we see his true character and it is bad. And people voting for him are not voting based on policy. They like bad. They like racism. They like the name calling, the smears, the tumult. It’s really just a vote of good against bad. Kamala/Walz are good people. Do I agree with every policy? Of course not. But the other side is bad. Bad people. The choice is easy if we just vote on character.
CMP commented August 26
C
CMP
NJAug. 26

@She 

If "Rick Lowery has a point," as you contend, it seems to me that a campaign focused on the character of the candidates would only serve to expose Trump as the most unfit individual (including George Wallace) ever to run for President.

If you actually think otherwise, please explain how Trump a convicted felon, a lifelong racist, an adjudicated sexual abuser and conman, who has been found liable for defamation and for massive business fraud can win a campaign in which he claims his character is more suited for high office than that of VP Harris.
DRapa commented August 26
D
DRapa
NyAug. 26

I assumed you meant he is a character.  But no… you didnt mention that the repetition he engages is are lies, over and over and over.  
His character includes cheating, stealing, meanness and cruelty.  Not to mention condoning and promoting sedition.  Are those the character traits we want our children to emulate?
Nikki commented August 26
N
Nikki
IowaAug. 26

For many years now schools across the nation have taught kids that Character Counts. They're taught the six pillars of good character: 

Trustworthiness: Be honest, don't deceive, cheat or steal. 

Respect: Be accepting of differences and courteous to others 

Responsibility: Be accountable to your words, actions and attitudes. 

Fairness: Play by the rules. Be open minded, listen to others and don't take advantage of others. 

Caring: Be kind and compassionate. Express gratitude and forgive others. 

Citizenship: Be a good neighbor. Protect the safety and rights of others. Protect the environment. 
(Source: charactercounts.org) 

Six year olds can master these character traits but Trump has shown that he cannot. He lies, cheats, steals, makes fun of individuals with disabilities, he's deceitful, rude and absolutely lacking in compassion and empathy. He takes advantage of everyone, in every way he can possible squeeze them, and then he brags about it. He routinely violates the rights of those around him and on a larger scale, encourages his rabid followers to violate the rights of every American who isn't cis, white, male and Christian. 

Which of these character traits does Trump display in either his personal or professional life? The answer is none. Not one. He cannot run on character because he doesn't have any positive character traits to stand on which is why he runs on a platform of bullying, cheating and lying.
Anon commented August 26
A
Anon
BostonAug. 26

I thought initially that this headline was a joke.  You can fill as many paragraphs as you want with real or imagined weaknesses of the Harris campaign, but they will always pale in comparison with a corresponding list of Trump’s character defects.  When the choice is between a would-be dictator and someone who’s perceived as a bit too far left, there simply is no choice.  Between someone who hasn’t solved the intractable problem of the border and a man who tore children  from their mother’s arms?  A woman who once endorsed the idea of universal healthcare vs. a man who wants to deny Americans access to healthcare at all?  A woman who came down hard on law and order vs. an aspiring tyrant who wants to turn US troops on our own citizens?  C’mon.  I hope most intelligent Americans can perceive these differences and vote for decency and sanity.
Ernest Mc commented August 26
E
Ernest Mc
Middlebury, VTAug. 26

I’m sorry but Mr.Lowry’s piece reads like a parody, albeit a dangerous one, and the NYT diminishes its reputation by publishing such foolishness. Trump has no character and is wholly unfit for office. He lives in the ultimate glass house. He stoked an insurrection and has still not admitted he lost in 2020. He and his cronies are working to overturn this election if he loses. How can Rich Lowry recommend any of this with a straight face? How could anyone vote for this washed-up, narcissistic felon when two decent people who have worked for the people their whole lives present an alternative? The mind boggles.
Nancy commented August 26
N
Nancy
CharlottesvilleAug. 26

"One of his talents as a communicator is sheer repetition". 
No! That is not communication to a nation. Repetition made Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address powerful: :we can not dedicate -- we can not consecrate -- we can not hallow this ground"  is only one use on that day.  
Trump is the petulant toddler who has not yet learned that he is not the solipsistic center of everyone's world.  Maybe a Coach and a Prosecutor could help him.
JJL commented August 26
J
JJL
USAAug. 26

Electing a President of the United States of America should not be a strategic “game”.  It should be a contest of values, leadership,integrity, vision and intelligence. 
Trump and his handlers have turned our elections  into a game show. One I fear we will never be able to disengage from.
MusicGuy commented August 26
M
MusicGuy
Dutchess County, NYAug. 26

Character? Trump can win on character? Irony is officially dead. The writer ignores the facts that Trump is a convicted felon and convicted rapist. Oh, and by the way he is out on bail in three other cases and jurisdictions. I'll say that slowly for the back..... Out. On. Bail. Every time Trump talks he is a spewing firehose of lies. This writer thinks Trump can win on "character". Good Grief.........
Peter M commented August 26
P
Peter M
MassachusettsAug. 26

Here's a couple definitions of Character:
1. Qualities of honesty, courage, or the like; integrity:
"It takes character to face up to a bully."
2. Someone who appears in a book, movie, TV show etc. : a representation of an individual personality in a fictional or dramatic work. a character in a play.
I think Lowry (and Trump) confuses the two.
Todd SW commented August 26
T
Todd SW
Sierra VistaAug. 26

Under such a narrow definition of character, Trump can attack Harris. The reality is that many people were going to vote for Trump over Biden just because Biden was old. Those voters were, for a period of time, Trump voters. At that time, they were willing to overlook Trump's total amorality and vote for him regardless, perhaps because he appears to be a strong man, although one who hid in the basement at the first hint of protest outside the White House, and who faked bone spurs to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. These voters now have to be persuaded that Harris is the better choice. The fact that all of Trump's serious advisers during his first term have found him unfit for office is pretty significant, and undermines the argument in this piece.
DJT commented August 26
D
DJT
TorontoAug. 26

Sounds like a plan, but no.

Women in the suburbs of the battleground states know that Trump and the Republicans are responsible for stripping away their reproductive rights. They have had their hard fought for emancipation taken away from them in the name of a paternal pseudo religious ethic that they do not support.

This is the “swing” vote that will ultimately deliver the presidency to Harris. The rest of the vote is essentially baked in. 

I don’t think Trump can counter the devastation wrought by his Supreme Court to millions of women by simple character assassination. After all, character has never been his strong suit, to say the least.

There is only one choice.
nclee commented August 26
n
nclee
CincinnatiAug. 26

Terrific headline for angry clicks, but tragically misleading. The entire premise of this piece is not that Trump should demonstrate any good character, but to simply attack the political character of his opponent. Let me re-write it: "Trump can win against her character".

This is the weakest of all arguments, but necessary when an aging convicted felon is your major party candidate. He has nothing to stand on, so this "thoughtful opinion piece" from an actual editor of a venerable editorial publication is that he simply have better focus when he attacks the Vice President.

Trump has no issues to stand on, has no character to demonstrate, has no principle to defend, so I guess he just needs to be better at attacking.

The conservative movement is on its last legs, and this dry cough of a guest essay is fittingly thin.
Eileen H commented August 26
E
Eileen H
ArizonaAug. 26

Assuming, without agreeing, that Harris is as weak as suggested does not solve Republicans’ problem.  Because there is nothing strong about Trump..  He had 4 years in the WhiteHouse and other than selecting some of the worst Supreme Court justices in history who repeatedly  reversed decades of precedent and stripped women of  a constitutional right, Trump accomplished none of the things he promised. Not on the border, not on energy, not on health care and not on infrastructure.   He did cut taxes for the top 10% but there was no trickle down.  Attacking Harris is not going to be enough. Trump needs to change and offer more than his zero sum, us vs them rhetoric.  Good luck with that.
Jerry commented August 26
J
Jerry
Seal Beach, CAAug. 26

OK
Then: "The Obama team hammered Mitt Romney on the issues in 2012, but pretty much every policy argument went back to the core contention that he was a heartless, out-of-touch capitalist who valued the bottom line more than people. That ended up being the winning argument of the campaign."

Now: The Harris team hammered Donald Trump on the issues in 2024, but pretty much every policy argument went back to the core contention that he was a heartless, souless, out-of-touch misogynist who valued his ego more than people. That ended up being the winning argument of the campaign.
Sam commented August 26
S
Sam
New YorkAug. 26

There are plenty of valid criticisms of the Biden-Harris administration, but it is not accurate to say that real wages were stagnant over the past four years. Overall, wage growth has outpaced inflation, with low earners seeing greater increases than high earners.
Nick Firth commented August 26
N
Nick Firth
MelbourneAug. 26

I think i just spat out my coffee in surprise at the heading of this opinion piece. Character will probably be an important consideration for voters, however not in the way the writer of this unintentionally hysterical column thinks.
Anne G commented August 26
A
Anne G
NJAug. 26

When I saw the headline, I assumed this was satire. You’ve got to be kidding me.
Brad Blumenstock commented August 26
B
Brad Blumenstock
St. LouisAug. 26

"Everyone knew in 2016 that he wanted to build a wall and have Mexico pay for it."

And, unlike Republican voters who apparently like being lied to, everyone who was able to acknowledge reality at the time knew that this "policy" was simply an empty talking point that completely ignored what would actually have to take place to begin to deal with the problem.
Gladys commented August 26
G
Gladys
MdAug. 26

"Not character in the sense of a candidate’s personal life, but the attributes that play into the question of whether someone is suited to the presidency — is he or she qualified, trustworthy and strong, and does he or she care about average Americans?"

By your own definition - emphatically not Trump.









