Could We See a 270-268 Election? The Polls Are Tighter Than Ever.
The latest Times/Siena polls show Harris leading narrowly in Michigan and Wisconsin, with Sherrod Brown ahead in Ohio.This morning, we concluded our wave of New York Times/Siena College post-debate polls in the battlegrounds, along with a special look at Ohio and its Senate race.
Kamala Harris led among likely voters by one percentage point in Michigan, two points in Wisconsin and nine points in Nebraska’s Second Congressional District. Donald J. Trump led in Ohio by six points among likely voters, 50 percent to 44 percent (he won the state by eight points in 2020).
When you add the other recent Times/Siena polls to the picture, the takeaway is clear: This is an extremely close election.
Imagine, for a moment, that the latest Times/Siena polls in every key state were right on the mark. They won’t be, of course, but here’s the result you would get in the Electoral College:
Harris 270, Trump 268.
In terms of the electoral count, it would be the closest modern U.S. presidential election.
If you average the six polls we did in core battleground states (we skipped Nevada in our most recent round), Mr. Trump led by an average of just 0.6 of a point.
We’ve had a lot of close elections in recent memory, but in none of them were the polls so close. In each of 2008, 2012, 2016 and 2020, a candidate led by at least a few points in enough states to make one candidate a material if not overwhelming favorite. As Hillary Clinton can attest, a modest but clear lead is not a guarantee of victory. But here, neither Ms. Harris nor Mr. Trump can claim even that.
This may be a year when the polls won’t suggest that any candidate is a favorite.
Looking back at Pennsylvania
Let’s step back and look at where these six states stand, comparing the presidential result in 2020 in each with the latest Times/Siena poll:

    Pennsylvania (Biden +1.2 in 2020): Harris +4
    Wisconsin (Biden+ 0.6): Harris +2
    Michigan (Biden+ 2.8): Harris +1
    North Carolina (Trump +1.3): Trump +3
    Georgia (Biden+ 0.2): Trump +4
    Arizona (Biden+ 0.3): Trump +5

Of these Times/Siena polls, the Pennsylvania survey stands out as Vice President Harris’s best result. Nowhere else is she running so far ahead of President Biden’s 2020 performance, and no state is more important.
Unlike in other states, we began our survey in Pennsylvania the night after the debate. As I mentioned in our write-up at the time, there were a few hints that the results were a little too favorable for Ms. Harris.
With memories of the debate fading and subsequent results looking stronger for Mr. Trump, it makes one wonder if a Times/Siena poll today would show a closer race there. We’ll be back in the field in Pennsylvania at some point next month.
Democrats down-ballot: Ohio
The competitive Senate races keep coming up “blue” in our polling.
Democratic Senate candidates led in Michigan, Wisconsin and, yes, even Ohio, where Sherrod Brown led by four points over the Republican Bernie Moreno, 47 percent to 43 percent.