https://www.nytimes.com/2024/11/04/business/media/new-york-times-strike.html?unlocked_article_code=1.XU4.5134.budkYU-cBSXF


Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
SEARCH
Media
SUBSCRIBE FOR $1/WEEK
Log in
Media
|
New York Times Tech Workers Go on Strike
Share full article


You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
New York Times Tech Workers Go on Strike
The Times Tech Guild represents more than 600 software developers and others who run the back-end systems behind The Times’s digital operation.



New


Listen to articles

Tap the Play button at the top of any article to hear it read aloud.

Listen to this article · 3:21 min Learn more
Share full article



Union workers outside The New York Times building on Monday.Credit...James Estrin/The New York Times
Katie Robertson
By Katie Robertson
Nov. 4, 2024
Updated 11:27 a.m. ET
The Times Tech Guild, which represents workers like software developers and data analysts at The New York Times, went on strike early Monday, just ahead of the busy Election Day news period.

The two sides negotiated until late Sunday. The sticking points in recent days were over whether they could get a “just cause” provision in their contract, which means workers can be terminated only for misconduct or another such reason; pay increases and pay equity; and return-to-office policies.

Times management said in an email to workers on Sunday that it had offered a 2.5 percent annual wage increase, a minimum 5 percent pay increase for promotions and a $1,000 ratification bonus. It also said that the company would maintain its current in-office work requirements of two days a week through June 2025, while allowing employees to work fully remotely for three weeks per year.

The guild said in a statement that its members would protest daily outside the company’s headquarters starting at 9 a.m. on Monday.

“They have left us no choice but to demonstrate the power of our labor on the picket line,” Kathy Zhang, the guild’s unit chair, said in the statement. “Nevertheless, we stand ready to bargain and get this contract across the finish line.”

The guild said it was asking readers to honor its digital picket line by not playing Times Games products, such as Wordle, and not using the Cooking app. It added that it had filed numerous unfair labor practice charges against The Times with the National Labor Relations Board over the company’s return-to-office mandates and its attempts to interrogate members about their intentions to strike.

Hannah Yang, the company’s chief growth and customer officer, and Jason Sobel, its chief technology officer, said in an email to the tech workers on Sunday night that management had “a strong offer on the table.”

“We are disappointed that the Tech Guild leadership is attempting to jeopardize our journalistic mission at this critical time,” they said in the email, a copy of which was obtained by The Times.

The Times Tech Guild, the country’s biggest union of tech workers with collective bargaining rights, was certified in a National Labor Relations Board election in March 2022. It has been negotiating for a contract since then.

Editors’ Picks

A Meal So Good, Politicians Leave Their Partisanship at the Door

This 3-Course Vegetarian Dinner Is Ready to Party

Bookstores Are Setting Up Readers on ‘Blind Dates’ With Books
The union voted on Sept. 10 to authorize the strike with the intention of walking off the job around Election Day, when a jump in readership is expected. The union’s more than 600 members maintain the back-end systems running The Times’s digital operation.

A Times spokeswoman said that the company had “robust plans in place to ensure that we are able to fulfill our mission and serve our readers.”

Many New York Times workers are represented by other unions. Times reporters and some editors are part of the Times Guild, while a number of workers at Wirecutter, The Times’s product review website, are also unionized. Those unions, as well as the Times Tech Guild, are affiliated with the News Guild of New York.

Wirecutter Union workers went on a five-day walkout in 2021 over the prime Black Friday shopping weekend to pressure management to agree to a contract. Times reporters and editors held a 24-hour strike in December 2022 over contract negotiations.

Katie Robertson covers the media industry for The Times. Email: katie.robertson@nytimes.com More about Katie Robertson

See more on: The New York Times
Share full article


Inside the Media Industry
The Washington Post: Hugh Hewitt, the conservative pundit, said that he would no longer write columns for the Post, where he had been a regular contributor to the paper’s opinion pages.

Comcast: The company’s president, Mike Cavanagh, said Comcast was weighing whether to cleave its cable networks from the rest of the company and also was considering finding a partner for its Peacock streaming service.

CNN: The network barred the conservative commentator Ryan James Girdusky from its programs after he made on-air remarks that seemed to imply that another guest, the pundit Mehdi Hasan, was a member of Hezbollah.

L.A. Times: After the Los Angeles Times canceled its planned endorsement of Kamala Harris, the daughter of the paper’s owner said the decision stemmed from Harris’s stance on the war in Gaza.

New York Magazine: The star political writer Olivia Nuzzi, who has been embroiled in scandal since she disclosed a personal relationship with the former presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr., has left the magazine.

Related Content
More in Media
Inside The Washington Post’s Decision to Stop Presidential Endorsements
The decision, made by Post owner Jeff Bezos, plunged The Washington Post into chaos during a crucial stretch.
Eric Lee/The New York Times

Jeff Bezos Defends Decision to End Washington Post Endorsements
Mr. Bezos blamed the timing of his decision on “inadequate planning, and not some intentional strategy.”
Jeenah Moon for The New York Times

How a 178-Year-Old Magazine Stays Relevant, One Instagram Post at a Time
“As an editor I need to be out there and have this curiosity and this voracious appetite for information and news and stories,” said Stellene Volandes, who has been editor in chief of Town & Country since 2016.
Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times

Jessica Tarlov Is the Liberal That Fox News Viewers Love to Hate
Jessica Tarlov, a regular on “The Five” since 2022, at the Republican National Convention in July.
Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times

The Daily Beast Tries to Claw Its Way Back to Relevance
Ben Sherwood and Joanna Coles took over leadership of The Daily Beast in April with the task of turning the money-losing site around.
Gili Benita for The New York Times

‘Martha’ Stokes a Debate: What’s a Documentary, Anyway?
“I’m a contractual final-cut filmmaker,” R.J. Cutler said. “The lens, figuratively and literally, is mine.”
Alex Welsh for The New York Times

Editors’ Picks
Ella Emhoff, Second Daughter of New York’s Downtown
Ella Emhoff has had her moments in the spotlight since her stepmother became vice president. But the friends and collaborators who make up her social life in New York say not much has changed.
Bryan Bedder/Getty Images

What’s That in Your Mouth, Bro?
Berkley Nahum pops a Zyn pouch outside Clandestino, a bar on the Lower East Side.
Dolly Faibyshev for The New York Times

After 7 Years, P’Nut the Squirrel Is Taken Away and Then Put Down
P’Nut the squirrel.
Mark Longo

Trending in The Times
A November Surprise Is Jostling the Markets
Authors Call for a Boycott of Israeli Cultural Institutions
San Franciscans Are ‘Fighting for Their Lives’ Over One Great Highway
Montana Camper Offered His Killer a Beer Before He Was Murdered, Police Say
New York Times Passes 11 Million Subscribers
He Lived in the Same Apartment for 30 Years. Then Came a Knock on the Door.
8 New Movies Our Critics Are Talking About This Week
Richard A. Cash, Who Saved Millions From Dehydration, Dies at 83
The Best Chore Coats, From $40 to $1,850
Man Repeatedly Punched Sleeping Passenger on Flight, Authorities Say
Shared with you by a Times subscriber
COLLAPSE


You have access to this article thanks to someone you know. Keep exploring The Times with a free account.
Log in or create an account
Maybe later
Site Index
Site Information Navigation
© 2024 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions