Opinion
Guest Essay
Gen Z Has Regrets
Sept. 17, 2024, 5:04 a.m. ET

By Jonathan Haidt and Will Johnson
Dr. Haidt is a social psychologist at New York University’s Stern School of Business; Mr. Johnson is the chief executive of the Harris Poll.
Was social media a good invention? One way to quantify the value of a product is to find out how many of the people who use it wish it had never been invented. Feelings of regret or resentment are common with addictive products (cigarettes, for example) and addictive activities like gambling, even if most users say they enjoy them.
For nonaddictive products — hairbrushes, say, or bicycles, walkie-talkies or ketchup — it’s rare to find people who use the product every day yet wish it could be banished from the world. For most products, those who don’t like the product can simply … not use it.
What about social media platforms? They achieved global market penetration faster than almost any product in history. The category took hold in the early aughts with Friendster, MySpace and the one that rose to dominance: Facebook. By 2020, more than half of all humans were using some form of social media. So if this were any normal product we’d assume that people love it and are grateful to the companies that provide it to them — without charge, no less.
But it turns out that it can be hard for people who don’t like social media to avoid it, because when everyone else is on it, the abstainers begin to miss out on information, trends and gossip. This is especially painful for adolescents, whose social networks have migrated, since the early 2010s, onto a few giant platforms. Nearly all American teenagers use social media regularly, and they spend an average of nearly five hours a day just on these platforms.
So what does Gen Z really think about social media? Is it more like walkie-talkies, where hardly anyone wished they had never been invented? Or is it more like cigarettes, where smokers often say they enjoy smoking, but more than 71 percent of smokers (in one 2014 survey) regret ever starting?
We recently collaborated on a nationally representative survey of 1,006 Gen Z adults (ages 18-27). We asked them online about their own social media use, about their views on the effects of social media on themselves and on society and about what kinds of reforms they’d support. Here’s what we found.
First, the number of hours spent on social media each day is astonishing. Over 60 percent of our respondents said they spend at least four hours a day, with 23 percent saying they spend seven or more hours each day using social media. Second, our respondents recognize the harm that social media causes society, with 60 percent saying it has a negative impact (versus 32 percent who say it has a positive impact).

Turning to their own lives, 52 percent of the total sample say social media has benefited their lives, and 29 percent say it has hurt them personally. Although the percentage citing specific personal benefits was usually higher than those citing harms, this was less true for women and L.G.B.T.Q. respondents. For example, 37 percent of respondents said social media had a negative impact on their emotional health, with significantly more women (44 percent) than men (31 percent), and with more L.G.B.T.Q. (47 percent) than non-L.G.B.T.Q. respondents (35 percent) saying so. We have found this pattern — that social media disproportionately hurts young people from historically disadvantaged groups — in a wide array of surveys.

And even when more respondents cite more benefits than harms, that does not justify the unregulated distribution of a consumer product that is hurting — damaging, really — millions of children and young adults. We’re not just talking about sad feelings from FOMO or social comparison. We’re talking about a range of documented risks that affect heavy users, including sleep deprivation, body image distortion, depression, anxiety, exposure to content promoting suicide and eating disorders, sexual predation and sextortion, and “problematic use,” which is the term psychologists use to describe compulsive overuse that interferes with success in other areas of life. If any other consumer product was causing serious harm to more than one out of every 10 of its young users, there would be a tidal wave of state and federal legislation to ban or regulate it.
Turning to the ultimate test of regret versus gratitude: We asked respondents to tell us, for various platforms and products, if they wished that it “was never invented.” Five items produced relatively low levels of regret: YouTube (15 percent), Netflix (17 percent), the internet itself (17 percent), messaging apps (19 percent) and the smartphone (21 percent). We interpret these low numbers as indicating that Gen Z does not heavily regret the basic communication, storytelling and information-seeking functions of the internet. If smartphones merely let people text each other, watch movies and search for helpful information or interesting videos (without personalized recommendation algorithms intended to hook users), there would be far less regret and resentment.
But responses were different for the main social media platforms that parents and Gen Z itself worry about most. Many more respondents wished these products had never been invented: Instagram (34 percent), Facebook (37 percent), Snapchat (43 percent), and the most regretted platforms of all: TikTok (47 percent) and X/Twitter (50 percent).
Almost half of Gen Z wishes social media platforms like X and TikTok didn’t exist
Percentage of Gen Z respondents who agree with the statement “I wish ___ had never been invented”

Our survey shows that many Gen Z-ers see substantial dangers and costs from social media. A majority of them want better and safer platforms, and many don’t think these platforms are suitable for children. Forty-five percent of Gen Z-ers report that they “would not or will not allow my child to have a smartphone before reaching high school age (i.e. about 14 years old)” and 57 percent support the idea that parents should restrict their child’s access to smartphones before that age. Although only 36 percent support social media bans for those under the age of 16, 69 percent support a law requiring social media companies to develop a child-safe option for users under 18.
This high level of support is true across race, gender, social class and sexual orientation, and it has important implications for the House of Representatives, which is considering just such a bill, the Kids Online Safety Act. The bill would, among other things, disable addictive product features, require tech companies to offer young users the option to use non-personalized algorithmic feeds and mandate that platforms default to the safest settings possible for accounts believed to be held by minors.
Of course, social-media platforms serve as communication platforms, which means any reforms must respect First Amendment protections; the House measure seeks to do this by focusing on what content is being recommended to kids through their algorithms, not on what kids are posting or searching for. But even so, imagine if walkie-talkies were harming millions of young people. Imagine if more than a third of young people wished that walkie-talkies didn’t exist, yet still felt compelled to use them for five hours every day.
If that were the case, we would take action. We’d insist that the manufacturers make their products safer and less addictive for kids. Social media companies must be held to the same standard: Either fix their products to ensure the safety of young users or stop providing them to children altogether.

Graphics by Aileen Clarke.
Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist at New York University’s Stern School of Business, is the author of “The Anxious Generation.” Will Johnson is the chief executive of the Harris Poll.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow the New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, WhatsApp, X and Threads.




































































Comments 644
Skip to Comments
The comments section is closed. To submit a letter to the editor for publication, write to letters@nytimes.com.

    Reader PicksAll

Katrina commented September 17
K
Katrina
EarthSept. 17

This article comes out on the same day as another NYT piece, in which young undecided voters complain that they "deserve more" from Harris, and that she lacks "substance." I wish that young people of voting age would take some of the HOURS they spend online each day to educate themselves about the two presidential candidates-- and then vote. After all, the policies that are put into place and the judges that are seated will play a huge role in shaping this country during Gen Z's most (re)productive years. They owe it to themselves to make an informed decision.

"Imagine if more than a third of young people wished that walkie-talkies didn’t exist, yet still felt compelled to use them for five hours every day"... and forgot to vote because they were too busy on their screens. There, I made it even sadder. 

Please VOTE!
RLG commented September 17
R
RLG
CTSept. 17

As a Baby Boomer I'd like to weigh in on the harm social media causes me. No, I don't use it. But it's hurting me. I'm surrounded by people who know nothing but what they see and read on social media. They make ill-informed choices and band together into cults. Our politics is being warped by falsehoods spread throughout these platforms. All of these things hurt me indirectly. I agree with Gen Z. Social media should never have been invented. It does far more harm than good. Not just to individuals. But to an increasingly ill-informed society in which I happen to live.
EWood commented September 17
E
EWood
AtlantaSept. 17

My daughters are in the age cohort of those surveyed (20 and 19). To my eternal shame and regret, we allowed them cell phones at 11 and personal laptops, ostensibly for school, at the same time. 

Despite our best efforts at limiting their access to certain sites and content, they still found their way to Facebook, Instagram and the absolute cesspool that is Tumblr among other things. (Kids are very adept at circumventing parental guardrails whether it’s curfews or parental controls on your wifi.)

Today my older daughter mostly avoids social media and removed herself from many multiplayer video games as well because she found the environments too toxic. My younger is more involved in social media but has said often that she wishes she hadn’t been exposed to it or the internet as a whole at a young age. 

We allowed them these devices amid a lot of begging, cajoling, and cries about peer pressure and I wish more than anything we had resisted until they were well into high school (or beyond). My only defense is that our understanding of the damage social media causes was much lower in 2015 than today. 

So my advice to parents of young kids is that while kids THINK they know what’s good for them, they don’t. You wouldn’t hand your kid a cigarette or a beer at age 10 just because their friends’ parents do. Don’t give them another addictive product — a smartphone — until they can pay for it themselves.
CN commented September 17
C
CN
DublinSept. 17

If the internet was a physical place would anyone happily drop their kids off there? Not likely. 

As long as platforms can operate anonymously or pseudonymously they are not safe for children, not healthy for adults, and massively disruptive for civil society. 

Governments need to legislate to ensure traceability and accountability.
RC commented September 17
R
RC
TennesseeSept. 17

"Your scientists were so preoccupied with whether or not they could, they didn't stop to think if they should." 

- Ian Malcom, Jurassic Park 1993

Twenty years later...we handed world-wide, instant, 24/7 access to the hands of our 12 year olds...and they can't let go.  The result?  300% increase in anxiety and depression.  Devastating.  Trust me, I'm a pediatrician.  Before 2013 or so, I never really even knew how to treat anxiety or depression aside from referring to psychiatry.  Now, its a daily task of mine since there are no where near enough psychiatrists.

The dinosaurs are running free and eating the tourists.
JS commented September 17
J
JS
VirginiaSept. 17

@Alexander 
Not sure how old you were from 2010-2017.  I have an 11 year old daughter who does not have a cell phone or social media accounts, but have observed her friends on the platforms and devices.

Kids (especially girls) at this age are desperate for their peers affirmation and acceptance.  Social media is the "quick hit" for this affirmation; whereas in-person social interactions are a much slower (although more meaningful) way of achieving the same affirmation high.

Think of it in terms of using a drug like cocaine versus running.  Both release levels of dopamine that make you feel better; however, the former releases a huge amount that takes little effort.  The latter releases a small amount, takes considerable effort, but is much better for you physically and mentally.
Todd commented September 17
T
Todd
SF Bay AreaSept. 17

We desperately need to regulate social media. Every other harmful and addictive product has laws protecting minors (alcohol, cigarettes, gambling…). Sure, parents play a huge role in this as well, but it’s a heck of a lot easier to keep a kid from drinking when they can’t just walk into a store and buy alcohol. And if they do, the store bears consequences too. We parents need help here against products that cause harm and are literally designed to be addictive.
Deirdre commented September 17
Deirdre
Deirdre
New JerseySept. 17

@Katrina
Agreed- I wish comments were allowed on those 

The only cogent and astute comment was the concern for funding social security.  

If young people voted in every election and made the effort to turn out their concerns would be prioritized

Not one was concerned about abortion and none seemed to understand how a president is limited by their congress. They put her down for being prepared - they call it rehearsed which sounded so misogynistic to me.  

They don’t value her prep but understood Trump didn’t prep at all.
Jason commented September 17
J
Jason
GeorgiaSept. 17

@Katrina

Totally agree that young people ought to be well informed and vote in force, but in all fairness, Frank Luntz seems to have real knack for pulling in the most poorly informed members of the electorate regardless of age. Every one of those interviews reads like a Petri dish of low information Americans. Rest assured, there are many, many young people who are aware of the stakes and will vote.
Will commented September 17
W
Will
MinnesotaSept. 17

As a professor at a top-ranked liberal arts college, I see two groups of students each day; one that spends most of their day on social media, and one, a much smaller group, that does not. In recent years, it is abundantly clear that the non-social media students are thriving academically and professionally, finding and completing career-launching internships, getting into top graduate schools, and getting good and well-paying jobs immediately after graduation, while the heavy social media users are not. I realize that mine is a tiny sample and very thin slice of the Gen Z population, and I cannot verify my observations with data, but my experience is that the smarter and more forward-looking students today are beginning to opt out of the algorithmically-powered attention economy.
JC commented September 17
J
JC
BrooklynSept. 17

Social media has stolen these kids' childhoods. In terms of both their happiness and time they could have spent developing relationships and social skills, reading, learning, being out in nature, dancing, playing music, doing art, experiencing the joy of youth in so many ways. And kids were conscious enough of their peers' opinions of them before social media, but now they have no respite. Their entire lives have become fodder for others' consumption. They have no private sphere.
Bruce Rozenblit commented September 17
B
Bruce Rozenblit
Kansas City, MOSept. 17

Sixty-two percent spend four hours or more on social media. That's a job. That's a career of doing what? 

Sounds like a lost generation to me.
Addicted commented September 17
A
Addicted
USASept. 17

Asking Gen Z, who have never known a world without social media, this question is pointless. 

Of course they will see a ton of benefits because as far as they’re concerned social media is how you communicate with people. 

The real question should be to people born in the mid 80s to mid 90s who have lived pre social media lives and yet have had to transition early enough that it’s become a necessary part of their lives. 

They will probably tell you fairly unanimously that it’s a major net negative. 

Also, the comparison to smoking is illuminating. For decades no one would have told you smoking was a net negative for them. It was only after decades of scientific research was able to get past industry funded misinformation that people recognized the harms of smoking and said they wished it had never been invented. 

We’ve barely begun noticing the harms of social media. If it’s anything like smoking it will be a few more decades until we know and the public at large realizes how bad it is.
kl commented September 17
k
kl
Richmond, VASept. 17

@RLG Really good point. This is why all those 'I don't use social media and I'm fine!' or 'I use social media and it doesn't bother me at all!' comments are so annoying. Our entire society has been degraded and it affects all of us.
J F commented September 17
J
J F
TexasSept. 17

@Katrina
It is maddening to hear yet another group of people say they want “policy details” from Harris or they won’t vote for her. At this stage, policy strategy and points of focus are all anyone can give…and that is completely normal. Trump doesn’t have any of this, unless you count Project 2025, which is nightmare fuel. 

Want more policy information, voters? Go to the Harris website and read the section on policies. Compare those strategies with Trump’s “strategies”.
That’s how being an informed voter works.
FunkyIrishman commented September 17
FunkyIrishman
FunkyIrishman
I slather hot sauce on everything!Sept. 17

Social media might make us sad, but it will be plastics that ultimately gets us. (considering we barely recycle 10%)

We are almost at the zenith of civilization whereas government will cease to function for the majority of us. There will be no protections for anything really, as conservatives make government HUGE for some things, and non-existent for others. 

Whole agencies are being rendered useless as the extreme conservative courts decide that experts cannot be used, or there is no authority any longer. We need more protections from conservatives it seems than social media. (even though they use it as a tool for this and that) 

We can't study things and their harms. We can't utter certain words. We can't impose any restrictions that goes against "freedom" and all that. We are hapless and helpless. 

As parents we are overwhelmed by the omnipresence of cell phones and the likes and the marketing. We fold to the peer pressure to buy those same phones for our kids at younger and younger ages. It takes us in as well, because whether we like it or not, we become helicopter parents and the negativity from.

Would I go back to the time that the most exciting thing was a pong game or a calculator? No, but there has to be a way we can balance things. It requires all of us to buy in to a sustained environment that is best for all. 

I just don't think we have the will power, considering we want a pill for weight loss instead of just eating less.
Kerm commented September 17
K
Kerm
WheatfieldsSept. 17

Keep cellphones absent for the school day; that will stop at least 6 1/2 hrs. per day...
E.B. commented 4 hours ago
E
E.B.
The Woods in PA4h ago

Social media is the pits. 

Wife and I both went off it about 3 years ago and I would not have a job again that required me to have a social media presence. It’s a toxic cesspool that has slowly but surely driven away vast numbers of sane and/or reasonable people. Leaving a disproportionate number of looney and/or confrontational personalities. Twitter/X is the most salient example of this. 

I’m Gen X so I remember how we would spend our time before all this nonsense. Go outside, take up an artistic pursuit, read an ACTUAL book, or just be present with the people in your life. 

Humans aren’t made to process the absolute deluge of information (most of it negative) that is firehosed into our hands and eyeballs daily. I’m afraid this includes articles in periodicals like this one as well.
Observer commented September 17
O
Observer
USASept. 17

@Katrina 

Your agreement is kind of like saying that poor people who smoke should just stop and then they’d have more money for other things. It’s true, but also completely unhelpful and misunderstands the pathophysiology of addiction.
JAS commented September 17
J
JAS
DallasSept. 17

GenZ? What about the rest of us? I see how devastating social media is as an older GenXer with a social media and Netflix habit. I grew up absorbing books like they were the air we breathe, but can now barely concentrate long enough to get through a long form magazine article. At least I have a timeline of history in my head and can pick out references to Shakespeare and other writers because I spent most of my spare time reading books until the 2010s. Now I watch cat videos and binge Bridgerton. Didn’t someone say authoritarianism comes creeping in while the populous is distracted by Slow Horses and Dark Winds?
Michel Willems commented September 17
M
Michel Willems
Montgomery County, TexasSept. 17

From the piece, “But it turns out that it can be hard for people who don’t like social media to avoid it, because when everyone else is on it, the abstainers begin to miss out on information, trends and gossip.”

I don’t use social media, I have never used social media, and I don’t intend to use social media in the future. Trends and gossip, I can do without, and the only information I seek is reliable information, something of a rarity in social media circles.
Tournachonadar commented September 17
Tournachonadar
Tournachonadar
IllianaSept. 17

Americans have always pretended to be very religious and devout, a legacy of our Puritan component.  Their real devotion is to the almighty dollar, of course, and most of us spend inordinate time and energy chasing money.  Because some people realized early in that this new computer platform could successfully be monetized, they also “invented” social media.  Though allegedly Zuckerberg stole the idea from a Harvard roommate.  It’s too late to put the genie back in the bottle.
Everywhere commented 12 hours ago
E
Everywhere
Nowhere12h ago

@Will anecdotally, I’ve noticed the same.  I teach occasionally as an adjunct as a side gig, and the students who are in their phones obsessively before class and during breaks all have notes for “learning disabilities “ while the thriving students are engaged before class with me or others (same during breaks).

Also anecdotally, one of my kids despises phones and social media, and she is in multiple advanced classes, taking 10th grade math as an eighth grader and gets As in everything.  Some of her friends complain how difficult school is, but whenever I talk to them, they are buried in phones.  Again, anecdotal, but not surprising
foxbrook3 commented September 17
f
foxbrook3
MassachusettsSept. 17

It is not just social media that needs regulating.  The internet marketplace itself is like visiting an Arabian souk.  Everyone is trying to sell something, con you, cheat you, deceive you.  I used to be able to make plane and hotel reservations online with relative ease.  Now it is torture.  We regulate the airwaves, demand licenses, and limit free speech.  Why is cyberspace not similarly regulated?
Pat F. commented September 17
Pat F.
Pat F.
United StatesSept. 17

@Katrina Agreed. I kept thinking about how poorly reasoned their answers were … how blind to the danger of Trump. Perfect is the enemy of good.
Sherry Irvine commented 11 hours ago
S
Sherry Irvine
Portland11h ago

It’s not just kids falling down the rabbit hole, it’s also old people. My ex had a mistress, his cell phone. He couldn’t take his eyes off of her. He communicated with her during dinner or while walking on a beach. The walks grew less frequent and dinners were a total bore. He always said he was listening when we were having conversations but his attention was really on the screen. I wonder how many marriages have been affected by this.
Paul Doane commented September 17
Paul Doane
Paul Doane
NHSept. 17

Social media is a mixed bag, especially for kids.  Kids and teens tend to be more openly vicious than adults and social media gives them new powerful weapons.  That, thankfully, is being addressed now.

I've avoided Facebook like heroin and golf.  People, adults too, get into Facebook and it's one of their big pastimes.  No thanks.

I'm confused seeing YouTube listed as social media.  There are aspects of it there - YouTube shorts etc., but overall,
I would rate YouTube as one of the greatest free educational devices on the planet.

I remember seeing a piece on 60 Minutes about a retired NFL football player.  He bought a big farm, tractors, etc. and started growing a lot of food to help feed poor people.  The amazed interviewer asked him "How did you learn to do all this farming?".

"You Tube".
Leslie commented September 17
L
Leslie
RaleighSept. 17

I'm old, and I had the luxury of being a wild and free latch-key kid with a set of parents ultra-absorbed in their medical careers that left me free to: ride my bike back and forth to school, make my own after-school snacks, play with my neighborhood friends, come home, settle in, ask for help with my homework and pass out, exhausted (I was a very high-energy kid). My parents left me to my own devices when I bored easily (often), so I would read, or watch the Nightly News with Tom Brokaw with my dad. 

When Facebook became a reality I treated it as a way to stay in touch with friends and family, because in the beginning, that's what it was. Early video games, like Tetris, were fun for me, but I grew up reading, writing, playing chess, singing in my high school choir and devoted to my high school debate team. 

Looking back on the hours I've spent with my nose in a book to alleviate my childhood boredom; who would I be now? All the hours spent with my feet on the handlebars, wind whipping through my hair, riding home from school, would I trade that exuberant upbringing for a childhood highjacked?  Looking back, I would never trade my hours of reading, writing, debating, singing in choirs and generally being a nerd, for needlessly scrolling; but I know that, because I am old. I would not have known that, as a kid. I was a high-energy kid, easily prone to boredom.

 I was lucky.
Looking around commented 5 hours ago
L
Looking around
Orange County5h ago

One thing that has really changed since the smartphone is the absence of simple daydreaming among the young, now that they always have addictive entertainment in their pocket.  Creativity, deep thought, and imagination suffer as a result. I think that’s really a major change.
Alexander commented September 17
A
Alexander
CyprusSept. 17

Not sure how messaging apps are social media. Sure if you use them to read and/or post in large channels/group chats with strangers, they are, but this is not how most people use them.

I struggle to understand how social media addiction works. I was on Facebook in 2010-2017, never used it much, and dropped out when pro-Trump voices started to dominate (it didn't take too much time to realise arguing with them was a waste of time). Never looked back.
RC commented 10 hours ago
R
RC
Tennessee10h ago

@RLG 

This is a brilliant post.  Perfection and so true.
TFD commented September 17
T
TFD
UWSSept. 17

@EWood Thanks for this. We have 10-year-old twins who occasionally ask for a smartphone but have stopped because it's always been a firm NO. We've also shown them videos explaining the dangers of social media and they're afraid of it. Last week (or week before?) when that awful choking trend was going around my daughter came home nearly in tears because she'd heard about it at school. She could not understand why any parent would give their kids access to something that could kill them. I'm very grateful my kids are the age they are. Hopefully, they skip social media altogether, and their generation will, too. The world will be better off the minute no one is interested in fake reality anymore.
E commented 10 hours ago
E
E
VA10h ago

@Katrina - Thanks for saying this. I actually understand why comments aren't allowed on those articles, because I can only imagine the disgusted reactions those young "undecided" maybe-voters garnered from the intelligent NYT readership. But they certainly deserve derision. 

I'm one of the Gen X Olds scoffing at their willful ignorance and demands that every single one of their personal issues be immediately addressed by Harris when Trump is a sentient calamity who WILL make all of their lives much harder and far less lucrative. 

I don't have too much faith in these younger generations, and their obsession for social media over real life is high among my reasons for doubting them.
Eustacia commented September 17
E
Eustacia
NYCSept. 17

When you use an algorithm to promote content you have turned yourself into a publisher, not simply a level platform.
When these companies promote content they know to be harmful, they should be held to the same standard of a newspaper, magazine, or network newscast.
Michael commented September 17
M
Michael
North CarolinaSept. 17

"Nearly all American teenagers use social media regularly, and they spend an average of nearly five hours a day just on these platforms."

This bodes ill for the future, especially theirs.
Former teacher commented September 17
F
Former teacher
UsaSept. 17

@Katrina agreed, I wish we could comment there but yes, they have so much at their fingertips to make their own decisions. A lot of what I heard from that group was about economics, which is fair, but they can also find a lot on social media that compares the two plans. Also, the one member who said "I don't want my taxes to pay for someone's X" should know most of their taxes are going out of state anyway.
Bob commented 7 hours ago
B
Bob
East Lansing7h ago

I am struck by the irony of this article juxtaposed with the one about undecided young voters.   Their big complaint was not enough information on Kamala Harris and her positions.  Well maybe if they took one of those 5 hours a day online on social media and went to Harris's campaign web site they might have more information.  Pages and pages of specific policies on a wide range of issues.  Disagree if you want but there is plenty of information
Andrew P commented 11 hours ago
A
Andrew P
UT11h ago

@EWood 
Thank you for your advice. As a teacher I am constantly trying to warn all parents I know how dangerous smart phones are. I am usually brushed off as alarmist. I wish more parents recognized the harm these phones are doing.
Everywhere commented 12 hours ago
E
Everywhere
Nowhere12h ago

@EWood we have our kids flip phones until they were 14.  Still wish we had waited longer …

Even still, getting a flip phone was more difficult than I expected, and we only did that because pay phones no longer exist!
Tom Wanamaker commented 9 hours ago
Tom Wanamaker
Tom Wanamaker
Neenah, WI9h ago

@Deirdre - I was thinking the exact same thing. 

It's so frustrating when young, undecided voters say, "I want to hear more specifics from Harris."

No they don't.  

They want short, pre-digested sound bites that can hold their attention for 30 seconds.  If Harris began to explain specific policies in detail during a debate or some other forum, these viewers would yawn and change the channel.
mainesummers commented September 17
mainesummers
mainesummers
NHSept. 17

In my 60's, I added Instagram a few years ago.  For the most part, I was looking at decorating and organizing tips after we moved into our new home.  

What started as a helpful way to see different looks and ideas became constant scrolling. It pulled me into a black hole of purchases and comparisons that spiraled. 

 Disabling Instagram gave me several hours back daily and I have not returned, but the first month was difficult.  You really need willpower to withdraw from certain things.
Jack commented September 17
J
Jack
IndianapolisSept. 17

As someone with no social media who is one of the last millennials/ earliest Z prototype, I often feel adrift in this weird digitally-dominated world.  

Often I find myself in a quiet room despite being filled with people, all staring at beaming screens, which I liken to being sober at a moly-rager type of party, glancing empathetically at the whirling dervishes around me transcending space and time through their collective somatic intervention.

It is interesting how too often people will react to me saying I do not have the social media with the same response to the effect of 'Oh, wow, yeah I wish I could quit' or something.  As a former cigarette smoker, I get it.  

But I also don't.  

I also get this odd fawning when people hear about how many hobbies I am able to pursue amidst having a full time and part time job.  It is amazing to go ride bikes or something.  I have time to make healthy dinner for my partner and I, walk the dog, hang with the kitties, etc.  I feel bad for everyone, yet have no clue how to help with any of it. 

Thanks for the reporting on an important issue, I hope we can all be more just social in the future without needing the media part.
Dani Palo commented 10 hours ago
D
Dani Palo
Washington DC10h ago

@Katrina those articles are just rage bait. Undecided voters at this point are not worth your energy. They are either trolling us or so ridiculous that I don’t think any amount of research will change their vibes over the election.
E commented 9 hours ago
E
E
VA9h ago

@Katie - Kamala Harris doesn't owe *anything* to any individual voter in this country. She works for The People, which is a grouping that includes every single American. 

She has pledged to drag this country out of the violent and immoral Trumpian cesspool that could potentially drown us all in corruption, and she has the prior experience and brainpower to back up that promise. 

Is that not good enough for the undecideds, or do they expect Kamala to send them a DM or something?
Boomer Gal commented September 17
B
Boomer Gal
The Radishes Are UpSept. 17

People with a healthy sense of self, a character of independent or even iconoclastic bent and the intelligence to delay gratification have none of these issues.  And they don't require the ego-stroke of "connection" via electrons.  The well adjusted have conversations in the flesh, meet peers in "the wild" and actually read books.  THIS is the VERY small slice that will succeed in a world spinning ever faster, leaving the slow, the addicted and the depressed behind.
J. Carolyns commented September 17
J
J. Carolyns
OregonSept. 17

@EWood This is great advice. My stepdaughter got a phone at age 11 since she was walking and bussing to school. It should’ve been a flip phone.
Jimmyboy commented 11 hours ago
J
Jimmyboy
Manhattan11h ago

College prof here...in the last two or three years I have been astonished to see how less able my students are at concentration...reading the words in a book...allowing contrary ideas to enter their head without becoming upset/uncomfortable. I implore them to put their phones away at least once every hour. If successful, they then switch to their laptops for more scrolling. I see their eyes; they're transfixed and very clearly hooked. I have no idea what this will turn into as they become adults, but I am not ashamed to say I'm a bit glad I won't be around to watch.
marc commented September 17
m
marc
WestchesterSept. 17

Tobacco companies. Food companies. Online gambling enterprises. Credit card companies. Street level drug dealers. Global pharmaceutical concerns. 

Social media companies.

Every marketer wants addicts. And we all want to be saved only after we’re already hooked.
Coletrane commented September 17
C
Coletrane
East of EdenSept. 17

Hi, parent of a 6 and 4 year old here.

I am a millennial and wish smartphones (tablets, etc) were not introduced to our kids. It's pervasive now in the attention economy world in which we now live.

 Despite limited and regulated use, and steering toward apps like PBS-kids, etc, I am noting signs of addiction. I noted the benign ranking of Youtube in GenZ poll, however, the YouTube-kids format and content seems to be the drug of choice, and that is a problem with content still crafted to grab as much attention as possible. The genie is out of the bottle and its extraordinarily difficult to get it back in,

Message to new and expectant parents: take a lesson from it. Think twice before introducing this into your house,
Kelly commented September 17
K
Kelly
MarylandSept. 17

It isn't just social media companies that are the problem. The young adults that were surveyed were failed by all adults - Schools didn't and don't limit phone use.  It allows teenagers and youth to be on phones all. day. long.  

It means so many youth have an airpod in all day long - listening to music and/or just tuning out what is around them. It means access to social media and messaging all day. It means avoiding in-person interaction even when sitting in the same classroom or passing in the hallway. It means losing out on so many social skills gained in middle and high school. 

All schools should have a no phone policy. Lock up phones upon arrival and get phone back when they leave. Force kids to interact in-person, make friends, develop relationships of all kinds. 

Yes, regulate social media. I agree. But that takes a great deal of will by congress vs. huge companies that lobby for their own interest.  Limiting phone use during school is much, much more manageable and practical of a solution.
François commented September 17
F
François
SwitzerlandSept. 17

@Katrina Those youngsters are actually well-informed. They don't want Harris to inform them, they want Harris to cater to their conservative wishes, blissful of the vast coalition she has to harness.

They want Harris to fail. They want a tribute to deign lift a finger. 
So that has nothing to do with social apps.
617to416 commented September 17
617to416
617to416
Ontario via MassachusettsSept. 17

It's an odd conundrum: all our technologies—from the internal combustion engine to plastics to pesticides to social media—make our lives much easier at the very same time they destroy or natural and social environments. 

Humanity has reached a stage in its evolution where the very technologies that allow us to thrive in the world are destroying the natural and social ecosystems we depend on for our survival. 

We are flying high, but our wings are melting fast.
Paul Smith commented 11 hours ago
P
Paul Smith
Austin, Texas11h ago

Think how many classic novels these people could read if they weren't on social media for 4-5 hours a day.  Tolstoy and Proust are probably better for one's moral development then Instagram and TikTok.
Jdinguncbia commented September 17
J
Jdinguncbia
BkSept. 17

The problem is that social media is a business. What works for the needs of business is poison for the users.   There will never be non malicious social media cause it doesn't maximize profit.   

For example they all turn women's compulsion towards forming social hierarchies and defining social status into a straight up addiction.  Ratcheting up the comparisons, judgements, and harassing each other in passive aggressive means
Everywhere commented 10 hours ago
E
Everywhere
Nowhere10h ago

@smootie kids with true disabilities, yes, I agree with you.  Over the years, I would have maybe 1 or 2 out of every 20-30 students with letters asking for accommodation.

Last time I taught, however, 9 out of 15 students had letters, and of those, at least 7, maybe 8, seemed dubious at best.  They were among the whiniest students I’ve ever had.
The Professor commented 10 hours ago
T
The Professor
Philadelphia10h ago

@Katrina Well said, I had similar feelings when I read the interviews. Ignorance is a terrible state of mind and many of these Gen Z individuals are woefully ignorant and/or misinformed.
Someone commented September 17
S
Someone
OHSept. 17

@David Patin I'm a community college professor, so here are my observations. First, when I walk into a classroom, every student is glued to their phone. A lot of it seems to be watching videos (Tik Tok). Second, when we work on an activity in class, as soon as a student is finished they're on their phone again. Third, many times I walk down a crowded hallway and there is eerie silence because students are listening to their phones on headphones. This may be punctuated by someone talking out loud to their phone, probably on FaceTime.
David Marshall commented 7 hours ago
D
David Marshall
Radford VA7h ago

Social media are not about socialization. They are corporate marketing tools used to gather data. Perhaps some ones FB friends are true friends, but in general they are not going to show up on moving day.
Evan commented September 17
E
Evan
USASept. 17

I noticed that the percentage of young men who believe that social media has had a positive impact on their mental health was significantly higher than the percentage for women. Knowing how many young men have been drawn into women-hating incel ideologies, however, I wonder if maybe they simply mistake the harms that have been inflicted on them for knowledge or wisdom. It’s easy to imagine some of these young men thinking that Andrew Tate, Joe Rogan, Jordan Petersen et al have brought them some sort of enlightenment, when really all these influencers have done is burden them with hate and ignorance.
Jahnz commented 11 hours ago
J
Jahnz
NY11h ago

@Observer except the difference is it costs them nothing but diverting their attention to something else. Asking that people spend a few hours on the phone learning about political candidates instead of social media isn't nearly as big a challenge as quitting smoking, come on.
George commented 11 hours ago
G
George
Washington, DC11h ago

As a professor, I've noticed in recent years that more and more of my students are opting out of social media. 

Several years ago, I followed their lead and deleted my widely-followed Twitter account (it helped that Musk had just taken over). I might have a bit less influence in my field now. But my mental health is much better.

Social media is one of the most harmful addictive substances in human history. The sooner it's abolished (likely impossible) or fundamentally reformed (more likely), the better.
Rod Sheridan commented 9 hours ago
R
Rod Sheridan
Toronto9h ago

4 to 7 hours of social media use per day?

I'm retired and that's more free time than I have in a day.

That means for those people, no time spent;

- walking the dog
- woodworking/painting/sewing or other hobbies
- no visiting friends, hiking, biking, swimming etc

what an awful life.
Hunter McC commented 7 hours ago
H
Hunter McC
Kansas City7h ago

As someone on the elder end of Gen Z (26), it has shocked me how time and continual effort it has taken me to wean off social media. I've tried different apps limiting time allowed, getting others to enter passwords that I can't override, leaving my phone behind entirely whenever I can, and deleting my accounts on some of the worst offenders and after 3 or 4 years it's only now really starting to really stick. I think the ubiquity of having it growing up makes it harder to quit it cold turkey. It's scary trying to find ways to communicate without it as we've been conditioned to for half our lives, and simply moderating our usage is often not effective. Along with this, even if you do decide to quit completely, breaking a fast or a ban is also just a few taps away at all times; With how phones are required for work and constant accessibility is expected, it almost feels like forcing someone trying to wean off smoking to carry a pack of Camels with them.
Sunshine commented 7 hours ago
S
Sunshine
USA7h ago

I am a geriatric millennial, and I have regrets!  I didn't even us social media until about age 27 or so, and got my first smart phone at the old age of 34.

I was instantly addicted.

Online life went off the rails a few years later, concurrent with the 2016 election and then COVID.  I had terrible insomnia, and often found myself angry and sleepless over what a stranger had posted online.  I had anxiety attacks for the first time in my life.

LUCKILY....I remember a couple decades of life before I had social media and smart phones, and had the self-awareness to make the connection.  I quit social media, and erased most "time wasting" apps from my phone.  Now my phone is boring and utilitarian.  I still use it, but it's not addicting.

I worry about kids who grow up with this as the norm.  They won't have that low-tech baseline to remember, to be able to say to themselves, "geez, I was sure a lot happier before I had social media."
ltglahn commented 8 hours ago
l
ltglahn
NYC8h ago

@Fred Norman The law does ban both alcohol and gambling for minors.  Don't see the point in advocating a repeal of those restraints.  Esp. if it leads to more drunk-driving deaths of innocent victims, which is closer to the point RLG was making.
Jerome S. commented September 17
J
Jerome S.
ConnecticutSept. 17

I think there’s something beautiful to the concept of social media. A global digital commons should have a place for people to connect and share experiences from around the world. It’s wonderfully human. 
Unfortunately, trillions of dollars of investor cash was put into these platforms before anyone knew what they were really worth, and so the past two decades has seen each platform become more and more monetized in order to provide some return for those investors. This largely meant selling your data to marketing (and political consulting) firms, but in order to maintain engagement and boost their own ad sales, it soon also meant developing algorithms designed to steal your attention and time and, sometimes, your money. 
When I was young, I would go on Facebook and see a timeline of my friends and relatives going about their lives. Some of what was posted was insipid, much of it just plain boring, but what mattered was being able to see what my friends and family were up to, even if I had to take it all with a grain of salt. 
My friends and I are still connected on Facebook, but they don’t pop up in my newsfeed anymore. Now my newsfeed largely consists of: advertisements by companies that exploit laborers in the third world to make dirt-cheap clothes; posts by “influencers” designed to gin up as much political or moral outrage as possible, just to gain those clicks; and weird groups of total strangers bonding over a tv show or a political tendency. 
Capitalism did this.
Trob commented September 17
T
Trob
bklynSept. 17

It would have been interesting to have included the parents of these kids. My kids were not allowed a screen, phone or any social anythings until 9th grade. When they finally got one, their interest in social media was negligible. 

However, the pushback from fellow parents was amazing. The saddest thing, was that these parents would insist that their third grader needed an expensive iPhone for "safety" and needed to be on social media because "everyone was on social media and they didn't want their kid to miss out".  My kids, both in college, thank me to this day. Meanwhile, many of the parents mentioned above still track their adult children's location on apps like Live 360.
Mask Of Comedy/Tragedy commented 12 hours ago
M
Mask Of Comedy/Tragedy
Northeast12h ago

The world would be a better place if Twitter, Tiktok, Facebook, Instagram and the like simply did not exist. I mean this with all seriousness. Anything we can do to regulate these addictive platforms that provide very little that is positive would be good

I do not understand how people can spend 4-7 hours on social media. Please remember that these are not the equivalent of online magazines or newspapers that contain long form articles.  I was always a newspaper reader. It never caused me harm. Now typically I read such media in their online form. I do participate in the comments but I feel the dialogue here is mostly from thoughtful people who are genuinely trying to make sense of things. I learn from the articles and I learn from others here. I don’t feel the social media platforms are comparable. There is not a lot of true learning that takes place.
TJ Fractured commented September 17
T
TJ Fractured
Des MoinesSept. 17

I don’t have an account on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, TikTok and am not interested in the personal lives of people I don’t even know. I have friends, family and a full life. Traveled rather than pursued material things. Hiked, backpacked, hunted, fished and camped by myself many times. Listen to music pretty much every day. Once in a while we’ll use FaceTime or get on a Zoom meeting but that’s rare.
There’s a whole world to explore out there and it’s tough for me to imagine sitting on a couch playing video games. Been married 34 years and my wife doesn’t have an account on any social media, either.
Might get a Facebook account if we move to Ecuador, Costa Rica or Panama but there’d have to be a heckuva good reason.
JC commented September 17
J
JC
BrooklynSept. 17

@William Romp I'm not a parent so have no dog in this fight, but this seems a bit harsh toward parents who don't have the privilege of being "self-employed home-schoolers" and must work outside the home.
ololo3 commented 11 hours ago
o
ololo3
Washington11h ago

@Katrina Agreed.  The internet age makes everything so immediate and easy that these young people are now thinking absolutely everything should be that way - immediate and easy without requiring them to work at all.  They're just using social media to take in what other entitled people who have done no actual research say, then form opinions based on those.  The whole attitude is "I want everything handed to me on a silver platter.'
FunkyIrishman commented September 17
FunkyIrishman
FunkyIrishman
I slather hot sauce on everything!Sept. 17

@Jdinguncbia 

I disagree on the sustainability part because we are inventing new ways to conserve or recycle daily, but we just don't prioritize or bring to scale. 

AS for options for all, well, we all want to live, correct? Let's start from there and work our way outwards. It probably won't be solutions that help every single person on earth, but we can work for the vast majorities. 

Giving up is not an option.
delete delete commented September 17
d
delete delete
united statesSept. 17

I’ve been off social media since 2012, and it hasn’t affected my life. While others stress over likes and followers, I stay connected with real friends through calls and texts. Life without social media is freeing if you can let go of FOMO and realize that your life is worth living just the way it is.
PSS commented 11 hours ago
P
PSS
NJ11h ago

it's difficult for me to relate to teens and pre teens more and more - we don't have kids but are very engaged with our nieces and nephews and the way in which they interact with the real world to me is stunning, on the phones 24/7, their world view is as much a product of virtual reality as it is in their friends and family - little things, like the fact their parents helicopter-ed over them when they were in elementary school, they were never allowed to walk to school by themselves, as we were back in the 70's/80's, but they have nearly unfettered access to the web - my little niece is 11 going on a very bitter 30, already with a sense of entitlement and sass which had i displayed when I was her age would have gotten me a nice slap - and the idea they are 'owed' stuff is mind boggling, having been connected to a virtual world which celebrates possessions and access to unlimited experiences I believe has left them feeling empty and bereft, as if regular existence is a disappointment if you're not being 'liked' or 'shared' by people you've never met - Neil Postman and George Orwell were right, humanity will be destroyed not by bombs, but by entertaining itself to death...
Biff commented September 17
B
Biff
Santa FeSept. 17

We have several good charter schools to choose from near my home. But only one of them has banned cellphones. And that's why we've decided to continue going there. It wins hands down.
Democratic Voter commented 10 hours ago
D
Democratic Voter
California10h ago

@EWood
I am 75 years old and chose to never have a Smart phone, do not use Social media. I do have an iMac and an iPad.
Every child development class I took at university prepared me to believe that once you give your child a Smart phone, they are no longer your child. You have introduced the most addictive thing (aside from illegal drugs) a child will ever have that also leads them away from you and your values.
IanC commented 9 hours ago
I
IanC
Oregon9h ago

The government should simply ban anonymity. Register every account with traceable, personal details so everyone is accountable for every word they write and every post they put on the internet.  
I am confident the content would clean up very quickly.
Charlie C commented September 17
C
Charlie C
Tourrettes sur LoupSept. 17

Another excellent piece of work showing the support for regulation.

Not receiving enough visibility is the opportunity cost. Imagine what many of these young people could achieve if those hours were spent advancing some skill.
Scott commented September 17
S
Scott
New Brunswick CanadaSept. 17

@FunkyIrishman If your prime value is that people should strive to make as much as they want economically in a nearly unhindered fashion, then all other more noble goals fall by the wayside because they do not feed into or support the primary goal. From my perspective, people have decided they want to elevate avarice, cheap elegance, talentless attention, scandal, opulent wealth and all the awful behavior that goes along with it.  We've never had it so good (in so many ways) and yet people increasingly feel things are worse than ever. For the rest of the world to listen to Americans complain about their poor economy while exhibiting record levels of  societal wealth is both sad and hilarious.
Carrie commented 12 hours ago
C
Carrie
Traverse City12h ago

@Tim Ernst it’s where the language of their generational identity is forged. If you’re not on TikTok, you won’t know the meaning of the slang your friends are using. You’ll miss the jokes, the memes, and all the cultural artifacts that offer a sense of belonging. It spills over into real life interactions, and not being online makes you less proficient in your own cultural identity. There are steep social costs to not belonging to internet culture. And… it’s addictive. If you used to spend 5 hours a day on it, not doing so involves reinventing your entire life’s routine in a fairly massive way. For an age group that’s prone to boredom and ennui, it’s not so simple to just stop and be someone different instead.
DS commented 12 hours ago
D
DS
Brooklyn12h ago

Private for-profit companies are making and selling products that cause harm to users?   And nobody is doing anything about it?  There is a word for this:  capitalism.
smootie commented 11 hours ago
s
smootie
Canada11h ago

These kids have never known what it's like to experience true privacy and having the space to get lost in your own thoughts. Us older folks are in a special position in history: we've experienced part of our adult lives pre-internet, and so we know what it feels like to come home at the end of the day and be truly alone, with the pleasure of being able to psychologically breath. 

I've explained what that was like to my 20 yo daughter, and she does become envious, given what she can imagine from my description. A natural introvert and creative person who values her spare time, she does her best to turn off the noise, but as this article indicates, it's tough for these younger to generations to not feel they're jeopardizing their friendships if they're not available and tuned in.
Mark commented 11 hours ago
M
Mark
CA11h ago

@Katrina Agreed. Seeing people explain-away the lack of substance by simply finger-pointing at politicians is pretty rich. Yes, Republicans have been purposefully weaponizing communications for decades now. But even good political actors need to cater their message to a public that needs to be breathlessly entertained.

Young people (and older people too) want to be spoken to seriously? Then they need to respond to seriousness not vapid self-gratification.

Amusing Ourselves To Death came out in 1985. You would think it would have acted as a wake-up call to the frailties of the human condition. But, maybe predictably, form has increasingly continued to exclude content.

Don’t like being pandered to by politicians? Then don’t make it so easy for them to do it. Or better yet, don’t PROVE to them that it’s what you actually prefer.

Wake up. We get the government we deserve.
Mark commented 11 hours ago
M
Mark
Montreal11h ago

@RC 
This is the M.O. of humans unfortunately. We never think about whether we SHOULD do something, just whether we CAN do it. The same thing is happening now with AI with similarly predictable results.
common1sense commented 8 hours ago
c
common1sense
Seattle8h ago

@Deirdre   

The majority of young people to middle aged people have never taken any civics classes.  That's a problem.
Northwest Parent commented 9 hours ago
N
Northwest Parent
Bellevue, WA9h ago

@RLG my 16 year old daughter feels the same way.  She’s not on any social media platforms and has no desire to be, because she sees what it does to her peers.  But she has to put up with everyone on their phones at school and friends gathering around them to watch TikToks at lunch time.  Many of her peers, she feels, she has nothing in common with, because TikTok is all they do.
Rachel commented September 17
R
Rachel
BostonSept. 17

@Addicted I remember life before social media.  It wasn't anything amazing, people weren't more erudite or less selfish or less prone to believing falsehoods, systems weren't less broken.  

Social media has positives and negatives.  Like most things.
Kathleen commented 11 hours ago
K
Kathleen
NH11h ago

@Observer  
Is social media "addictive"?  I think of it like fast food.  It's readily consumablewith no effort on your part, feels good in the moment, and you keep going back for more even though you know it's not good for you.  But is it an addiction or a bad habit? I vote for bad habit and habits can be changed more readily than true addiction.
Christian commented 10 hours ago
C
Christian
New York10h ago

@RC I wish I could recommend this more than once
Looking for the Adults in the Room commented 8 hours ago
L
Looking for the Adults in the Room
USA8h ago

I teach rhetoric courses for high school students.  I let the students choose the topics about which they would like to write, believing that they will be more invested in the writing process when they are writing about something about which they feel passionate.  The number of students in my classes for the past two years that have advocated for greater restrictions on teen phone and social media use has been staggering.  They WANT to be off it.  They recognize the attendant harms to both their physical and mental well being.  They also feel that they cannot relinquish their phones/delete social media without risking disconnection.  They regularly argue in favor of laws that would limit content and general availability.  They are desperate for the adults in the room to help them.

But I guess if we won't protect them from gun violence, why would we think to protect them from this danger?
Dana commented 4 hours ago
D
Dana
Washington4h ago

This reminds me of chemicals that are determined by the public to be toxic long after they are ubiquitous, and long after the creators already knew this. It's hard to go back and try to do damage control when the damage is already done. America doesn't have the greatest track record when it comes to balancing public welfare v. companies wanting to make a fortune.
Diane M Glampers commented September 17
D
Diane M Glampers
DetroitSept. 17

If social media is so ‘great’ at connecting people, why are there record levels of depression and loneliness? 

How many articles have we read about silicon valley execs not allowing their children anywhere near cell phones/social media. Many of these execs/developers have written articles about their great remorse for having invented these devices to be like crack for primates - after they earned their millions first of course. 

Asking young users if they have regrets about its development is almost pointless because they dont know any other life,  so they have no idea what they missed out on by spending 5-7  hours a day staring at a screen watching cat videos and skibbidy toilet guy. (Their parents are doing the same thing - which is why the kids are clocking so much screen time.)

Social media should be strictly regulated for the sake of everyone, but in the profit-driven, personal information stealing oligarchy we live in, well, good luck with that.
Kb commented September 17
K
Kb
CaSept. 17

My niece, great niece and nephew and brother-in-law carry their phones around like they are life-support machines. I miss them.
Tim Holmes commented 11 hours ago
T
Tim Holmes
Helena, MT11h ago

I long for a return of the corporate charter, that regulated corporations in the US until the 1860's, requiring corporations to have public accountability. They should have to prove they improve the lives of the populace to exist. That alone would clean out many of the predators of our capitalist system.
DLinMaine commented 10 hours ago
D
DLinMaine
Maine10h ago

Parents need to take some of the blame here.  Social media was as much of a baby sitter for GenZ as televison was for Baby Boomers.  Difference being, TV has been regulated and social media has not.
Ralph commented 5 hours ago
Ralph
Ralph
pompton plains5h ago

My wife & I recently drove through a college campus near our home.  We probably saw about 100 students walking on campus while we passed.  Not every student was gazing at his or her  phone, but every single one had a phone in his or her hand.  

Something is wrong when you can't walk down the street without having your phone at the ready.  An article on Bloomberg radio today asserted that colleges are requiring less book reading in part, because students have a shorter attention span that doesn't lend itself to reading books.

Maybe social media is hurting Gen Z ( and everyone else) more than they realize.
EWood commented September 17
E
EWood
AtlantaSept. 17

@TJ Fractured If you’ve been married 34 years, I infer that you’re middle age or older. By the time social media — and the cell phone for that matter — came around, you had already gone through the crucial period in your life where you developed your social and cognitive skills. It’s much easier to simply avoid or set aside social media when your life has been built outside it. 

But the authors are writing about kids, teens and young adults, who experienced their crucial years of development immersed in the online world — long before they were able to develop the skills to resist or cope with its pernicious effects. 
We are only beginning to understand how their brain and emotional development has been affected by phones and social media.
Sally commented 11 hours ago
S
Sally
Hudson, NY11h ago

@Paul Smith I was recently re-reading Anna Karenina on my phone. During one lunch break, a coworker said, "I can't believe how much time you spend looking at your phone."
smootie commented 11 hours ago
s
smootie
Canada11h ago

@Everywhere  I taught adjunct, too, for many decades, and in my experience, kids with 'learning disabilities' were most often among my best students. They worked hard, were smart, and often creative thinkers. In fact, my own kid has accommodations and has always been an A student.
Stuart Watson commented 10 hours ago
S
Stuart Watson
Hood River, OR10h ago

I'm addicted to the Times' Comments sidebars. This is social media, of a more constructive, moderated variety. I just love scrolling through the variety of reactions to the piece we've all recently read. I still remember the day my mom sat me down before she and dad went out for the night, and read me a thin, illustrated version of Peter Pan. My mind went wild. For awhile after that, I craved flying off to Neverland. Reading written, printed material became my drug. A career in journalism let me share what I had learned about our busy world and its amazing people. Something tells me -- maybe the data in this story -- that people will realize how destructive social media and crack phones have become, and incline us to "just say 'No'". Just back from a camp trip miles from phone service. Lovely time reading "East of Eden." Try it. You'll like it.
Paul commented 10 hours ago
P
Paul
Colorado10h ago

I've never used any form of social media and I still wish it had never been invented. I'm 69 years old and had the privilege of growing up in a world you had to learn to navigate without any electronic devices. Neither of these circumstances make me virtuous. Not using social media was a choice. Growing up without it was not, though it made that choice easier. 

I'm glad Haidt and Johnson are drawing attention to the Kids Social Media Act. This important and overdue legislation would strip away many of the more pernicious and addictive elements of social media that prays on young people and does real damage to their development. I hope it gets the attention it deserves. 

Though I am not a user of these media I am still affected by them. Regular news media is peppered with references to social media and the ways in which it spreads hateful, racist, misogynistic, antisemitic, threatening, smarmy and snarky, often anonymous drive-by angry messages around the world in nanoseconds. Often these messages and their effects is what passes for news itself. I think we badly need an Adults Social Media Act, formerly known as regulation of an industry known to cause serious health problems.
Julia commented 4 hours ago
J
Julia
USA4h ago

I see an economic divide coming.

I purchased a Bark phone for my teen, which allows me a lot of control over what they can access.  But, it costs money!   It would be a lot cheaper to just give them an old hand-me-down phone when another adult upgrades theirs.  But, those won't have all the parental controls.

A lot of parents of my middle schooler are choosing Apple Watches for their kids instead of phones, because it is limited in functionality and has parental controls.  $250 just for the watch.

There are router filters that can monitor and block content.  But again, it costs money and it's a lot cheaper to do nothing.
Francie Nolan commented September 17
F
Francie Nolan
WilliamsburgSept. 17

I am a baby boomer and used to use Facebook and Twitter. Now I don't. I became really angry during the pandemic, with all the disinformation about public health and vaccinations and it had become an echo chamber of extremism for me, so I quit. I miss some of the people, heck, I miss most of the people I knew only from FB, some of whom had been friends from different phases of my life, and this was our only means of communication and connection. But the cost was too high, and I stopped.

My millennial child, on the other hand gave it up before they left for college. Neither they nor their friends use social media because they value their privacy and know that the internet is forever.

In sum, the risks outweigh the benefits. Do I wish we had never had social media? Not sure; without seeing the damage it has done, would we yearn for something like it, and strive to create it? Maybe.

The other thing about social media is that it is short attention span theatre and contributes greatly to the inability of the young to focus on anything for very long. 

We cannot build a better and more just world on pretty shiny things.

Asking Government to regulate it presents the challenge of Government's having been bought and sold by lobbyists. Any regulation will come with costs that the People will pay. I don't see any other solution but I don't trust Government to get it right until Citizen's United is repealed.

A girl can dream, right?
TFD commented September 17
T
TFD
UWSSept. 17

Thanks for this. We have 10-year-old twins who occasionally ask for a smartphone but have stopped because it's always been a firm NO. We've also shown them videos explaining the dangers of social media and they're afraid of it. Last week (or week before?) when that awful choking trend was going around my daughter came home nearly in tears because she'd heard about it at school. She could not understand why any parent would give their kids access to something that could kill them. I'm very grateful my kids are the age they are. Hopefully, they skip social media altogether, and their generation will, too. The world will be better off the minute no one is interested in fake reality anymore.
Everywhere commented 9 hours ago
E
Everywhere
Nowhere9h ago

@smootie I will also note that most of the kids I’ve known with true learning differences or disabilities will thrive in spite of them.

There are, however, many kids who learn to milk their “differences” and use them as a crutch or excuse; I often wonder how these kids will ever lead successful lives if they don’t learn how to succeed in spite of their difficulties.
RLG commented 7 hours ago
R
RLG
CT7h ago

@Watching 
Yeah, my wife tells me the same thing. This isn't a free for all. Comments are screened and the posting forum is liable for its content. Make Facebook, X and TIk Tok legally responsible for what's posted and I might have a change of heart about the whole industry.
L commented 6 hours ago
L
L
Central City6h ago

My brother and his wife got their 4 year old a smartphone when she was 2. We go out to dinner and as soon as the child fusses they shove a phone in front of her and play something out loud for the whole restaurant to hear. It is extremely embarrassing. They are also strict about me or my parents trying to distract the kid with anything other than the phone. Her parents get exasperated and angrily tell us to use the phone. It's messed up.
G. commented 5 hours ago
G
G.
M.5h ago

My 19 year old is not on Instagram by choice but often misses out on college activities because many groups seem to ONLY advertise meetings and events on Instagram. So frustrating.
Gerald commented September 17
G
Gerald
VirginiaSept. 17

I starting using Facebook and other internet sites for the sole reason of promoting my business and it was successful.  However, Facebook required a personal page before you could have a business page and people that were visiting my business page also visited my personal page and asked to be Friended and I accepted.  In time I started to read and respond to posts on my PP and that was the beginning of the end for me.  I’m no longer on any social media site, and yes, business is down, but it’s worth it.
BABitt commented September 17
B
BABitt
Konstanz, GermanySept. 17

@Michel Willems  I also am not on social media, but that causes me to miss out on lots of relevant local information, which I end up getting through friends connected mostly to Facebook groups.  It’s a fact of life.
The Morrigan commented September 17
T
The Morrigan
The BattlefieldSept. 17

"If any other consumer product was causing serious harm to more than one out of every 10 of its young users, there would be a tidal wave of state and federal legislation to ban or regulate it."
What about guns? Pretty obvious hole in the argument. The "fact of life" that simply needs to be admitted and then (hopefully) overcome is that anything in this country that makes money will remain unregulated. Money is the only god. The American people want legislation on a number of fronts but so long as our politicians keep taking bribes from corporations and donors, no legislation will come. So sorry kids of America! The adults will not protect you. Money is everything and humans are expendable in this country. 
All this to say: make a better argument next time.
Thomas commented 11 hours ago
T
Thomas
Reston11h ago

73 year old here - SM, especially AI enhanced SM, is another cross Gen Z will have to bear.  Boomers like me and our progeny have heaped problem upon problem on the heads of these young people - gun violence, climate change, financial inequity, broken government - and somehow they will have to deal with all these issues.

. . . with social media influencers- real or fake - telling them how they ought to do it.

Yikes!
J O'Kelly commented 11 hours ago
J
J O'Kelly
NC11h ago

If a child is spending five hours a day on social media, I'm sorry, but that is the result of lack of parental control. 
Teenagers should be given a simple phone that does not provide access to the Internet, but does enable contact with parents and friends. Their access to the Internet through a computer which they might need for school, should be strictly limited. They should have no access to the computer except when they are doing homework. If they kick and yell and scream and resist, too bad; they'll get over it. Fill their lives with positive activities.
DrDarn commented 7 hours ago
D
DrDarn
Nashville, TN7h ago

When history unwinds the current epidemic of severe mental health illness in children and adolescents, Dr. Haidt will be viewed as an oracle. I am a pediatric emergency medicine physician and work in a tertiary children's hospital ER. Most Americans have no idea of the magnitude of this mental health crisis but those of us working in emergency departments do. Why? Because we are overwhelmed by the number and severity of children affected. And as Dr. Haidt so thoroughly presents the evidence in his book "The Anxious Generation," the cause is the permeating effect of social media platforms on our youth. History will regard the purveyors of these as monsters.
Enough commented 6 hours ago
Enough
Enough
USA6h ago

The first person in our family to ditch all social media was our oldest son (millennial, now in his 30s). He was a high school student with a YouTube channel full of creative and educational videos that teachers were widely using in classrooms -- he deleted everything.

Frankly, at the time, I thought it was extreme (and I bet some teachers were sad). But now I have learned from my son. The last social media platform I deleted from my phone was Twitter the day Elon Musk came on board.

I've never, ever missed it. 

I was an early adopter who used social media for causes and political organizing -- I'm finding other ways.

By the way -- VOTE BLUE up and down the ballot. 

See -- there are other ways.
polly commented 6 hours ago
p
polly
nyc6h ago

saying that gen z has “regrets” wrongfully implies that they were the ones who opened the pandora’s box that is social media. 

the truth is quite the opposite—it was mainly baby boomers, gen x, and some millennials who created and popularized these highly addictive sites. older generations reaped the benefits of social media with few repercussions. as adults during the advent of social media, their brains were already mostly or fully developed, so they could use the sites without becoming addicted to them. 

meanwhile gen z (and now, gen alpha) suffers from attention deficits, social media addiction, and loneliness at unprecedented rates. they were born into the internet era because previous generations thought it was easier to plug kids in than encourage healthy habits. on top of all this, employment opportunities and local in-person communities for young people are at an all-time low. 

no wonder young people can’t stand to live in the real world! the comforting narcotic of scrolling on tiktok/ instagram/ whatever site creates the next billionaire plutocrat is all they know. they have no alternative. it’s a sad time to be a young person, and I fear it will only get worse.
KAnn commented 6 hours ago
K
KAnn
usa6h ago

A genius and radical idea that I read from someone else in a comment in another article: Greatly limit the hours of availability. Imagine : all of these platforms only open M-F 9-5 (or something along these lines). The concept brings a sense of relief.
Betsy commented 6 hours ago
B
Betsy
MA6h ago

One detrimental effect not mentioned is ADHD-like symptoms that so many of us have developed-- but especially young people.  With such constantly shifting attention to various kinds of posts, people can no longer focus for sustained lengths of time.  Not to mention that people now need to be constantly entertained and don't seem to be able to just "be."  On my commute, people are continually on their phones, swiping through videos (while loudly playing the audio on public transportation), and I see many, many people watching t.v. shows.  It feels like I'm surrounded by zombies who aren't fully conscious anymore.
K Nichols commented 5 hours ago
K
K Nichols
St. Louis5h ago

I was off social media from 2009-2015. It drove my husband crazy because I was never up to date on silly little things.
I went back on social media at the end of 2015 because we started traveling full time and I wanted to keep in touch. (Impeccable timing, I know) By 2018, we both deleted social media from our phones and never looked back. 
It turns out that the important people in your life will make the extra effort to share with you outside of social media. And anyone we only spoke to online didn’t end up being all that important to us. My husband still gets on FB every couple of months on his laptop and does some catching up, but the frenetic doom scrolling. (He does still doom scroll the instagram, but in a more limited capacity.)
I’ve stopped logging on even for birthday messages. Our mental health is much improved and we have more time for our most cherished relationships. Highly recommend.
DJS commented 5 hours ago
D
DJS
New York5h ago

What about the other generations ? Why is this article limited
to Gen Z ?  Most adults are glued to their smartphones and other devices.
rodney fitzhugh commented 5 hours ago
r
rodney fitzhugh
ridgway, colorado5h ago

“If any other consumer product was causing serious harm to more than one out of every 10 of its young users, there would be a tidal wave of state and federal legislation to ban or regulate it.”

This is a patently  false. Allow me to offer a few obvious examples: sugar, salt, Network TeeeVeee, Cable TeeeVeee, coffee, six-guns, long guns, airplane glue, kava, kratom. And so on.  

As Joe Biden would say, “here’s the deal:” Some people just don’t have any self control. That problem is getting worse because 21st century parents don’t have time to regulate and structure their children’s lives because their parents didn’t have time to do that because, since about 1980 we all have to work 60  hours a week to feed and clothe and shelter our kids because greed heads like Trump, Musk and Zuckerberg and millions of miguided Americans think getting rich at any cost to moral, cultural, spiritual and psycological health is all that matters. It is and always has been the Americann Way, and that imperative continues to intensify year after year after year because the genius Founding Fathers were the original American Greed Heads who designed our system intentionally to foster unscrupulous greed. 1980 was when St. Ronnie decided we should all just accept that fact and start living according  to its natural, intended effects.
E.B. commented 4 hours ago
E
E.B.
The Woods in PA4h ago

Social media is the pits. 

Wife and I both went off it about 3 years ago and I would not have a job again that required me to have a social media presence. It’s a toxic cesspool that has slowly but surely driven away vast numbers of sane and/or reasonable people. Leaving a disproportionate number of looney and/or confrontational personalities. Twitter/X is the most salient example of this. 

I’m Gen X so I remember how we would spend our time before all this nonsense. Go outside, take up an artistic pursuit, read an ACTUAL book, or just be present with the people in your life. 

Humans aren’t made to process the absolute deluge of information (most of it negative) that is firehosed into our hands and eyeballs daily. I’m afraid this counts you too, NYT!
MariannaNYC commented 4 hours ago
MariannaNYC
MariannaNYC
Berlin, Germany4h ago

The only “ social media” I use is LI, the free basic account, just to know I can find a few old friends if I want to, basically like a phone book. It would not cross my mind to post pics of my vacation or of the things I  eat or every detail of my day on a platform. I do not believe in “likes” and in having digital “friends”. When I was a child I had a few pen pals ( remember them?) but those required actual writing and the patience to wait for days/weeks for a reply.
A lot of things made much more sense. 

So yes, I do wish social media were never invented. The damages exceed the advantages by far.
Emily commented September 17
E
Emily
CTSept. 17

Thank you for this and any coverage which may highlight the notion that we owe it to some generations to teach them about the critical, responsible, and ethical usage of our collective online knowledge databases and these seemingly unrelated applications of them. 
While it may seem obvious to some of us (I’m Gen X) that the reliability of information available on the internet has a huge amount of variability, it’s abundantly clear to me that this is not the case for the populations of other age groups.
TJ commented September 17
T
TJ
NYCSept. 17

I think the following from the linked survey is important to note:

‘Nine in 10 adult Gen Z (94%) associate social media use with the word entertaining, and 76% of those who use social media use it as an entertainment source. ‘

Excluding in person socialization, past generations looked to television, movies, sports and books as entertainment which were regulated toward minors.

Television was wholesome family entertainment.  Movies geared towards kids had messages of kindness and were fun to watch.  Kids now are exposed to violence. politics and social activism much more.

Thank you for this article which has given me consideration points in supporting regulation on social media.
Richard commented September 17
R
Richard
OttawaSept. 17

Given how much kids are on social media, when do they have time to see family, friends, do sports, study, dream, etc…? This level of time wastage is going to seriously cripple our kids and society.
JW commented September 17
J
JW
FLSept. 17

This is how CAPITALISM works: invent something new, no matter whether or not we really need it, market it as something absolute needed, and people will love it. The smart phone is a great example. The latest version, with AI in, it is there  ($ 800 - S1000). When you look on the internet you can get it for $ 30 a month. This is how advertising works to get you hooked.
Who benefits?
No 1 the big corporations with incredible profits. 
Who loses? We the people who are barely educated and waste their time using these tools. Their is no social people to people environment anymore. 
Case in point; a family of four sits in a restaurant for lunch. Father and mother and two children have all a smart phone and no conversation.
Just look around: people walk in the streets with a smart phone in front of their face, bumping into each other or a car they didn't see.
That is how capitalism works. It is all about money to the point that we outsource the production to other countries so the US companies can make even more profit and employ fewer people.
But I guess that is how we define the ECONOMY.
No wonder that we the people are complaining about the economy because we can't stop to use all these unnecessary gadgets. 
Maybe, maybe, we should invest more in EDUCATION so we can learn to critically THINK about what is happening around us!.
Nicole commented September 17
N
Nicole
NevadaSept. 17

@Kelly 100% agree. As a high school teacher, I don't think the general public has an inkling of the fact that a very large percentage of students are on social media or have an earbud in the entire school day. Any adult who doesn't actively push for a ban in schools is failing the children. Teachers do not have the support to stop this. We need the community's support.
Alex commented 10 hours ago
A
Alex
Boston10h ago

@Alexander Got it, so as an adult who wasn't inundated with this medium at a developmental age, you were able to disconnect from it.

Do you see how this isn't the dunk you think it is?
Andrew commented 10 hours ago
A
Andrew
Ithaca, NY10h ago

@Ron May 
It isn't different--both are bad for people and society at large.
Katie commented 9 hours ago
K
Katie
Minnesota9h ago

The problem with limitations for kids on social media is obvious to anyone who's ever been a kid on the internet: you just lie about your age. "You must be over 18 to visit this site." Yes, I am a grown up, porn please! It's easier for a kid to "prove" they're an adult than it is to prove they're not a robot.

The onus is on the parents here. The actual grown ups in the situation have to take charge. Do not give children smart devices. But more importantly, do not use smart devices yourself. If your kids see you on your phone all the time, they are going to think that is normal, healthy behavior. If you're on social media, but your kid isn't, they will become resentful. Set a better example. Social media is terrible for everyone, of any age.
IanC commented 9 hours ago
I
IanC
Oregon9h ago

@EWood  :  It's okay, EWood - you love them and you did (and are doing) your best.  I have the same regrets and wish that I had been stronger, meaner, or whatever it would have taken to keep those toxic devices and apps away from my daughters.  
Right now, they are 21 and 24 and, with age, have developed some insight into how these apps have affected them.  They have started to push back by deleting apps, finding hands-on creative outlets and getting into nature.  It gets better.
jd commented 7 hours ago
j
jd
San Francisco7h ago

the argument that social media are "not responsible for content created by others" should have ended when platforms began recommending content. Recommending equals editing, editing equals content creation and requires responsibility. Does NYT shirk responsibility when it publishes guest essays?
sil commented 7 hours ago
s
sil
wisconsin7h ago

I recently quit teaching math at a midsize liberal arts university, largely for this reason: my students were largely so thoroughly addicted to their phones that they couldn't do the work necessary to learn the content. Sure, a few students were dedicated. But I was constantly demoralized by a perpetual feeling of battling for "attention" and "engagement". The time before and after class, so precious for building community and little discussions about content, felt void. The halls between classes are full of students glued to screens. And now AI generated content, particularly the ability to "solve math problems" using Photomath and friends, has poisoned any sense of effort or ownership. I concede.
RayZ commented 7 hours ago
R
RayZ
Colorado Springs7h ago

@Katrina
Thank you for this!  I was torn between anger and despair reading the interviews with young voters. Where are people getting their (lack of) information on Harris’s views?!  It certainly wasn’t from reading the the “issues” section of her campaign website site. And moreover, do people not realize the President does not have a magic wand (as much as Trump assures them he does)?  What a President can get done is directly tied to the composition of Congress. Oy!
OhPlease commented 6 hours ago
O
OhPlease
PA6h ago

A more pertinent and useful question to ask would be: if social media didn’t exist within the context of capitalism which elevates the profit motive above all other needs and concerns, would it be as pernicious and harmful as it is given that the profit motive is what leads companies to design these products the way they exist now?
SMK commented 6 hours ago
S
SMK
West Coast6h ago

I forwarded Jonathan Haidt's article on phones in school in The Atlantic to colleagues and my principal last spring.  This fall our administrators and school board voted to establish a phone-free campus and require students to keep their phones in Yondr bags during the school day.

The difference in the climate on campus post-distance learning versus this year is night and day:  students are calmer and engaged in their learning, rather than apathetically scrolling on social media all through class.

As a high school teacher, it so So. Much. Better. rather than relying on students to "self-regulate" a product that is designed to be distracting and addictive.
News Runner commented 5 hours ago
News Runner
News Runner
U.S.5h ago

There's a reason that Steve Jobs and his cronies, early on, limited Internet access and phone usage for THEIR children.
Sunshine commented 4 hours ago
S
Sunshine
USA4h ago

@Jeanne   Many Gen Z is still under age 18, so this generation has limited political AND consumer power.

It would be nice for the Boomers and other generations to back them up a bit!
D commented 4 hours ago
D
D
North Carolina4h ago

These numbers are depressing beyond belief:  5 hours or more of social media per day??  How can that be?  In a country where the leading cause of death for children is firearms, is it possible there is something else that is actually worse?  Forget about an age limit of 16 years, it should be 45 years so that people can learn how to own and operate a brain during childhood and the first part of adulthood!  One wave after another of awfulness hits our children and our lives.
Cousy commented September 17
C
Cousy
New EnglandSept. 17

I am surprised at the finding that LGBT young people experience social media negatively. 

I have heard repeatedly from young people who are trans that having social media is a lifeline. It has helped them build community and get information, especially if they do not live in a city. 

There’s something about this piece that seems strident and biased. I can imagine that smartphones and social media is a mixed bag for young people (as it is for most of us), but this piece just doesn’t ring true to me. 

I am the parent of two Gen Z’ers. They didn’t have smart phones until they were 14, and I’m glad for that. But since then it has largely been positive.
Max commented 10 hours ago
M
Max
NYC10h ago

@Todd they had Zuck in congress apologizing left and right, then… nothing changed. Thank your representative!
William Romp commented September 17
W
William Romp
VermontSept. 17

My kids had phones as soon as they could read. We didn't experience any problems with social media--in fact, we found it useful, especially after the kids got driver's licenses and automobiles, to coordinate activities. Perhaps because we were self-employed home-schoolers there simply was not enough time to be on the devices more than a few minutes here and there, adding up to perhaps an hour. Lessons, chores, "wind-in-the-face" (our name for vigorous outdoor activity), reading, writing, cooking and cleaning were shared activities, and none of us had time for nonsense--mom and dad didn't spend any more time on social media than the kids did. 

Our policy of transparency and our habits of sharing interesting absurdities when we came across them caused us, as parents, to have a good idea of what our children were looking at on their screens, and vice-versa. The kids' reaction to social media was primarily, "Really? This is what other kids care about? Pathetic." 

My harsh verdict: if you are so disconnected from your children's lives that they routinely spend hours a day (seven hours? that's absurd) absorbing the toxicity of social media and you don't even know what they are viewing and posting, then "social media" is not the problem. Sober up, grow up, and get a grip on your parenting style before it is too late.
Joseph Hanania commented September 17
Joseph Hanania
Joseph Hanania
New York, NYSept. 17

When cell phones came out, its manufacturers claimed they were good for emergency use - as in if someone accidentally drove into a ravine.  That wedge led to their pervasive use today.  
With Facebook et al, the internet was supposed to be a place for good, chat groups allowing us to communicate with people around the world.  Soon enough those anonymous chats replaced real conversations; turned poisonous; and with eyes tuned in on screens, amplified our loneliness epidemic.  Because of my job and the ubiquity of apps to even order at a restaurant, I felt I had to first get a cell phone and be constantly available (I am not).  Then, I felt pressure to get apps which seem to propagate on my phone like out of control rabbits, but which I don't delete because that might cause problems elsewhere.  I would be much more comfortable with old style answering machines to take a message, and without all this tech.
Mike Pod commented September 17
M
Mike Pod
MassachusettsSept. 17

Aught is not a number. Naught means zero. How sad we missed the opportunity to refer to the naughties.
Woollfy1a commented September 17
W
Woollfy1a
FloridaSept. 17

I see the difference with my grandchildren and how I grew up being a post WWII baby boomer. I socialized with friends or acquaintances. I played basketball ball in school yards, and shot pool after school, I dated, a lot. It was a time where you’d go out with a girl for a few weeks or a month and then move on to another romance.  You met people at socials, dances etc. you didn’t even have to go to bars to meet people.  You learned to talk to people and to listen to them. 

It was personal contact, face to face when I grew up and now kids have their phones with apps that amuse and manipulate, with Google that tracks, and Amazon that makes shopping so easy you can avoid even enjoying retail therapy. 

My grandson would sit in his room at his computer and play games with friends that are sitting in their rooms at their computers and interact that way with each other. It’s bizarre. My granddaughter is never without her phone. 

Kids grow up having helicopter moms and can’t wait to get out of the house but when I suggest joining the military and finally grow up, they react with horror. It’s a shame that their growth is stunted by social media and technology, and with AI technology about to hit society to add more confusion to what is real and what isn’t it will be a mess.
Joel commented September 17
J
Joel
Sacramento CASept. 17

This article comes out the same day that Instagram announces new features that are supposedly designed to help teenagers. As a parent simply reading about them, I can already tell it’s a joke. They are barely safe guards and 16/17 year olds can override them. Ultimately, social media companies have no desire to actually regulate access to teens and children. It’s time to enact firm legislation banning social media until you’re 18, along with comprehensive education on the additive nature of these tools. As a Gen X employer my Millennial and Gen Z workers suffer from social media addiction and false sense of reality that their lives should look like all of the social media influencers they follow. Social media is way more like cigarettes than walkie talkies
Jason Robart commented 11 hours ago
J
Jason Robart
Austin11h ago

I can state scatologically, indubitably, categorically, I am a Social Media Addict. I sought and received treatment for my addiction after my friends held an intervention. It was like a Surprise Birthday Party. When I turned the key in the lock, opened the door, and flicked the lights on, everyone jumped out and greeted me with exaggerated enthusiasm bordering on pathology. My 1st thought was, I was being robbed. My 2nd thought was, Its not my birthday. My 3rd thought was, How did these people get in my apartment? Anyway, its good to have people that care. These r in the days when Twitter was Twitter and Facebook was Facebook. Anyway, I can’t say I was exactly cured but I have since quelled my inclinations, though my Smart Phones, plural, r never more than an arms length away, I resist the urge no matter if my phones r trying to get my attention. I let them wait.







