Election Live Updates: Harris to Meet With Zelensky as Focus Turns to Foreign Policy
Vice President Kamala Harris will greet President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in Washington, before visiting the border with Mexico on Friday. Former President Donald J. Trump plans to meet with Black pastors in Detroit.
Here’s the latest on the presidential race.
After days of focus on the economy, foreign policy will be in the campaign spotlight starting Thursday as Vice President Kamala Harris is expected to meet with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. The Ukrainian leader also hopes to speak with former President Donald J. Trump, who has said he will “probably” attend such a meeting.
On Friday, Ms. Harris will make a long-anticipated visit to the U.S.-Mexico border in Douglas, Ariz., her first as the Democratic presidential nominee. Immigration and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are two major foreign policy issues in the 2024 race.
archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
history←priornext→
	
26 Sep 2024 21:02:05 UTC
All snapshots	from host www.nytimes.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuse
Skip to content
Skip to site index

    Updates
    Poll Tracker
    Swing State Ratings
    Key Issues
    Election Calendar
    Senate Races
    House Races

Live
Updated 
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:53 p.m. ET11 minutes ago
Election Live Updates: Harris Urges Support of Ukraine, Not ‘Proposals of Surrender’
Vice President Kamala Harris appeared alongside President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in Washington, a sign that the Biden administration is positioning her to take over a fraught diplomatic relationship. Former President Donald J. Trump assailed her on border policy.

ImageVice President Kamala Harris speaking with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine.
Vice President Kamala Harris held a news conference with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Thursday.Credit...Eric Lee/The New York Times
Pinned
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Katie Rogers
Updated 
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:52 p.m. ET12 minutes ago
Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Katie Rogers
Here’s the latest on the presidential race.
Vice President Kamala Harris, standing aside President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, declared on Thursday that those who would have Ukraine trade territory for peace are supporting “proposals of surrender” — a dig at former President Donald J. Trump and his skepticism of aid for Kyiv.
Ms. Harris’s brief appearance with the Ukrainian leader was a sign that President Biden is positioning her to take over a politically fraught diplomatic relationship that has dominated much of his time in office. Ms. Harris, who did not name Mr. Trump in her remarks, said the United States could not cut itself off from the world. “Isolation is not insulation,” she said.
Mr. Zelensky, who met earlier on Thursday with Mr. Biden, thanked Ms. Harris for the meeting. The Ukrainian leader has also hoped to speak with Mr. Trump, who has said he will “probably” attend such a meeting.
Mr. Trump spoke at Trump Tower in New York to deride Ms. Harris on border security, a day before she was set to make a long-anticipated visit to the U.S.-Mexico border in Douglas, Ariz., her first as the Democratic presidential nominee.
There are 40 days until Election Day. Here’s what else to know:

    Melania speaks: Melania Trump, the former first lady, blamed the news media and Democrats for political violence in a rare interview that hinted at her post-White House isolation.
    Trump ad buy: One of the biggest super PACs supporting Mr. Trump, MAGA Inc., is adding $70 million to its television and digital reservations in four battleground states — North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Georgia and Arizona — in the final six weeks of the campaign.
    Ad watch: A pro-Harris ad portrays Mr. Trump as fighting for billionaires. Here’s a closer look.
    Trump’s travel: Mr. Trump’s advisers are considering modifying his travel plans after threats to his life from Iran and two assassination attempts. His team is considering what venues can be properly secured, and these discussions could alter how he campaigns in the final stretch of the race.
    Harris on MSNBC: On Wednesday, Ms. Harris sat for her first one-on-one interview on cable television as the Democratic presidential nominee. In a friendly exchange with MSNBC, she gave roundabout answers to open-ended questions. Read our takeaways.
    Back in Butler: Mr. Trump will return to Butler, Pa., on Oct. 5 for a rally at the same venue where he was nearly killed by a would-be assassin. The rally is set for exactly one month from Election Day, and Mr. Trump has said that the event will honor Corey Comperatore, the rallygoer who lost his life in the July shooting.
    More North Carolina fallout: Top staff members in the office of Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson, the Republican candidate for governor in North Carolina, will resign next week, following a CNN report that linked him to disturbing posts on a porn site. Eight top aides previously resigned from the campaign staff of Mr. Robinson, who was linked on Wednesday to other comments, including one suggesting that the police should have shot the Rev. Al Sharpton, a civil-rights leader and a longtime Democrat.

A correction was made on Sept. 26, 2024
: 
An earlier version of this article misstated Donald Trump’s schedule for Thursday. He will not attend an event in Detroit.
When we learn of a mistake, we acknowledge it with a correction. If you spot an error, please let us know at nytnews@nytimes.com.Learn more
Michael Gold
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:45 p.m. ET19 minutes ago
Michael Gold
Donald Trump is once again criticizing Kamala Harris for waiting until nearly four years into her time as vice president to visit the border. “Why didn’t she do it four years ago?” has become a refrain for the Trump campaign as he tries to tie her to Biden’s record.
Maggie Haberman
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:45 p.m. ET19 minutes ago
Maggie Haberman
Donald J. Trump is speaking at a lectern in the lobby of Trump Tower, reading from notes in an attempt to frame Harris’s border trip tomorrow.
Maggie Haberman
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:47 p.m. ET17 minutes ago
Maggie Haberman
There is a huge effort by the Trump staff to get him to stick to a script, and to focus on the economy. He vastly prefers talking about immigration, and this event feels like his staff giving him a treat.
Simon J. Levien
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:36 p.m. ET28 minutes ago
Simon J. Levien
The Albuquerque, N.M., police officers’ association has endorsed Donald J. Trump for president. The former president has already secured the support of the national Fraternal Order of Police, but his campaign is celebrating the Albuquerque endorsement, which arrived the day before Vice President Kamala Harris will make her first visit to the southern border as the Democratic presidential nominee. She is set to make a high-profile visit to the southwestern border town of Douglas, Ariz., on Friday.
Shane Goldmacher
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:31 p.m. ET33 minutes ago
Shane Goldmacher
Kamala Harris’s campaign thinks she can win on the economy. Here’s how.
Image
Kamala Harris speaking at a lectern. A screen with the words “Economic Club” and “Pittsburgh” in frame is behind her.
Vice President Kamala Harris delivered a speech to the Economic Club of Pittsburgh on Monday, pitching her economic approach as “pragmatic” and “practical.”Credit...Erin Schaff/The New York Times
For many months, it has been an undisputed and durable fact of the 2024 race that former President Donald J. Trump held a strong political advantage on the most pressing issue to the most voters: the economy.
But with less than six weeks until the election, some of Vice President Kamala Harris’s top strategists are making the seemingly audacious case that she will not only neutralize the longstanding Republican edge on economic matters but also flip the script entirely by Election Day.
“This is not just a central challenge, but a challenge that is winnable,” David Plouffe, a senior Harris adviser who served as former President Barack Obama’s campaign manager in 2012, said in an interview.
In fact, Mr. Plouffe and other Harris advisers say, the turnabout has already started.
They point to a number of brightening public polls that show that Mr. Trump’s once-daunting lead is eroding on the critical question of whom voters trust most on the economy. At the same time, there are economic atmospherics working in her favor with the stock market hitting record highs, gas prices dropping and the Federal Reserve slashing interest rates for the first time in four years.
In the battleground states of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, Mr. Trump’s edge on the handling of the economy was only two to four percentage points in the most recent set of Quinnipiac University polls. And while individual polls do not universally agree on the size of Mr. Trump’s edge, the trend line across a number of surveys, including from Fox News, CBS and Suffolk University/USA Today, shows Ms. Harris gaining ground with voters on the economy.
Patrick Ruffini, a Republican pollster, dismissed the Harris team’s talk of outright winning on the economy as “a little far fetched” and “bluster.” But he said her gains on the issue were real and substantial.
In June, Mr. Ruffini’s monthly national survey showed Mr. Trump with an 11-point edge on the question of who would make the economy work better over President Biden. That lead had shrunk to a single percentage point over Ms. Harris in late August, and in September she held a one-point edge.
“What they needed to do is get the economy to a draw, and arguably they’ve done that already,” Mr. Ruffini said. “It’s no longer this unique Trump strength.”
The change comes as Ms. Harris and her allies are pouring tens of millions of dollars into advertising that seeks to define her economic approach as focused on the middle class. The ads promote a list of poll-tested Harris policy proposals, including stopping price gouging on groceries, lowering housing costs and cutting taxes. The goal, advisers said, is to make her seem attuned to the concerns of working-class voters who are likely to swing the election.
And while she is not exactly distancing herself from Mr. Biden, she is trying to carve out her own distinctive identity.
Image
A crowd of supporters of Kamala Harris, some of them standing, cheer as they watch her speak.
When President Biden was still in the race, former President Donald J. Trump held a double-digit edge over him on the question of who would make the economy work better. Ms. Harris has virtually erased that advantage since rising to the top of the ticket.Credit...Erin Schaff/The New York Times
The latest pitch came in Ms. Harris’s speech on Wednesday at The Economic Club of Pittsburgh, where she framed the economic debate as a choice between “two fundamentally, very different paths.” She described her approach as “pragmatic” and “practical,” talking about her middle-class upbringing and at one point laughing off a reference to Mr. Trump’s oversized inheritance.
“For Donald Trump, our economy works best if it works for those who own the big skyscrapers,” she said. “Not those who actually build them, not those who wire them, not those who mop the floors.”
Mr. Trump’s team scoffed at the notion that voters were suddenly starting to trust Democrats after nearly four years of frustration about inflation under Mr. Biden. To press the point, the Trump campaign has been running ads that picture Mr. Biden and Ms. Harris together and end with her declaring “Bidenomics is working.”
“If the White House were a storefront somewhere on main street in America she would be out on the sidewalk trying to scrape her name off with a razor blade,” Tim Murtaugh, a Trump campaign spokesman, said. “She acknowledges it’s a wreck and wants nothing to do with it.”
In some ways, Ms. Harris is reprising the economic playbook of the Obama campaign in 2012, when Mr. Obama was battling persistently high unemployment and doubts about the Democratic stewardship of an uneven recovery.
The Obama campaign pressed to disqualify Mitt Romney, a former governor and corporate-turnaround artist, by casting him as a multimillionaire looking out only for himself and his rich friends. “A plutocrat married to a known equestrian,” one Republican famously summarized the Democratic caricature.
The television ad that Ms. Harris has put the most money behind so far features a narrator warning that “Donald Trump has no plan to help the middle class — just more tax cuts for billionaires.” Her most-run ad this month, which is narrated by the actor John Doman from “The Wire,” features him saying, “Kamala Harris is focused on you.”
Mr. Plouffe, the senior Harris adviser, said one of the key indicators in 2012 proved to be who voters thought cared more about people like them. “Barack Obama was able to win that question,” he said. And answers to that question are now being closely tracked in Wilmington, Del., where the Biden-turned-Harris operation has its headquarters.
One of the campaign’s internal surveys earlier this year showed that Mr. Trump was ahead of Mr. Biden by 13 percentage points on the question of who voters thought cared more about people like them, according to a campaign official not authorized to discuss the data publicly. But in the most recent head-to-head survey of Ms. Harris and Mr. Trump on that question, Ms. Harris was ahead of Mr. Trump by three percentage points.
“We’ve got an advantage,” Mr. Plouffe said. “And so the question then is how big can we make that advantage.”
Trust in Mr. Trump on the economy has been deeply ingrained. The Republican candidate’s image as a decisive business executive was forged over a decade as the star of the reality television show “The Apprentice” and, before that, as the best-selling author of “The Art of the Deal.” And during his presidency — even as Mr. Trump was personally unpopular — confidence in the country’s direction reached its highest point in more than a decade, according to Gallup, until the pandemic hit.
“Trump gets an enormous amount of credit by saying the word ‘economy’ over and over and over, and so he’s very much associated with it,” said Molly Murphy, a pollster for Ms. Harris. “But our opportunity is defining for people what Trump will do versus what the vice president will do.”
Image
Donald Trump stands at a lectern while behind him supporters wearing hard hats hold signs reading “Trump Vance.”
Mr. Trump’s image as a decisive business executive was forged for years even before he entered the world of presidential politics, and a significant amount of voters continue to trust him more on the economy.Credit...Brittany Greeson for The New York Times
To that end, three of the four television ads that Ms. Harris’s campaign has spent the most on since she entered the race have emphasized a blend of her “middle class” background and an economic agenda that includes tackling the cost of groceries and housing, sharpening a contrast with Mr. Trump. The Harris campaign has spent about $35 million broadcasting just those three economic-themed commercials nearly 55,000 times, according to data from AdImpact, the ad-tracking service.
“It’s hard to win an election when you’re not engaged in a ferocious way on the things voters care most about,” Mr. Plouffe said of the economic focus.
Mr. Trump’s team still firmly believes the economy is a winning issue. The former president has held a number of events advertised as economically focused, including one on Wednesday where he mocked Ms. Harris ahead of her economic speech.
“Why didn’t she do it three and half years ago?” he said of her economic agenda. “If she has a plan, she should stop grandstanding and do it.”
Sarah Longwell, who founded a group called Republican Voters Against Trump and holds regular voter focus groups, said voters are not weighing Ms. Harris down with what she described as “Biden’s baggage” — so far.
“One of the most shocking things listening to swing voters talk about her is the extent to which she does not own the Biden economy,” Ms. Longwell said.
Republicans are determined to present Ms. Harris and Mr. Biden as a single package. One pro-Trump super PAC, Right for America, began to air an ad this week addressing younger voters. “Kamala Harris thinks you’re too stupid to realize she’s to blame for our record inflation,” the narrator says.
In May, Mr. Trump held a 12-point edge on the economy in a New York Times/Siena College poll of Pennsylvania. Mr. Trump’s lead was down to four percentage points this month, though his advantage was still more robust nationally and in the Sun Belt states.
Evan Roth Smith, a Democratic pollster, explained that Mr. Biden’s weakness was because voters didn’t think the president was focused on what they care most about: prices.
“Now when we test Kamala Harris, she has completely erased that disadvantage,” he said. “Voters think she is focused on prices just as much as Donald Trump. And they still think Joe Biden has his eye off the ball.”
Katie Rogers
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:08 p.m. ET56 minutes ago
Katie Rogers
Katie Rogers is a White House reporter covering Kamala Harris’s presidential campaign.
Harris meets with Zelensky, anticipating a handover of global crises.
Image
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, left, and Vice President Kamala Harris standing at lecterns in front of American and Ukrainian flags and addressing reporters at the White House.
“The most important moments in our history have come when we stood up to aggressors like Putin,” Vice President Kamala Harris said on Thursday as she appeared at the White House alongside President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine.Credit...Erin Schaff/The New York Times
Vice President Kamala Harris met with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Thursday at the White House, a sign that President Biden’s administration is positioning her to take over a politically fraught diplomatic relationship if she wins the election in November.
The meeting, held shortly after Mr. Biden announced $8 billion worth of military support to the war-torn country, was Ms. Harris’s second this week with a key world leader — even as she runs a presidential campaign focused on domestic issues.
Ms. Harris, who has met with Mr. Zelensky a half-dozen times since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, said at the White House on Thursday that she would “ensure Ukraine prevails in this war,” adding that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia “could end the war tomorrow.”
She said the fight in Ukraine “matters to the people of America,” and framed the conflict as one that the American people should recognize as highly consequential.
“The most important moments in our history have come when we stood up to aggressors like Putin,” Ms. Harris said, warning that the Russian leader would not stop with Ukraine, and would possibly even look into encroaching on NATO territory, if he succeeds in his campaign.
“History is so clear in reminding us,” Ms. Harris said, “the United States cannot and should not isolate ourselves from the rest of the world. Isolation is not insulation.”
Neither Ms. Harris nor Mr. Zelensky took questions from reporters after about nine minutes of joint remarks.
The vice president is not scheduled to hold any meetings with other major allies before the election, advisers said, the starkest sign yet that she will turn her energy to swing-state barnstorming and focusing on issues that voters have said will decide this election: the economy, abortion and immigration.
But later on Thursday, she is scheduled to deliver Rose Garden remarks about curbing gun violence alongside the president.
Her campaign argues that she has already demonstrated more global leadership as vice president than her Republican opponent in the November election, Donald J. Trump, did as president. Officials pointed to the support she has received from hundreds of national security officials, who said they believed that Mr. Trump posed a threat to national security and democracy.
“Vice President Harris understands that the American people stand on the side of freedom, democracy and rule of law,” Morgan Finkelstein, a national security spokeswoman for Ms. Harris’s campaign, said in a statement. “She knows that if America walks away from Ukraine, Putin would be sitting in Kyiv with his eyes on the rest of Europe and our NATO allies.”
For his part, Mr. Trump has focused on domestic and international issues at his campaign events. In a speech on Wednesday in North Carolina that had been forecast as focusing on the economy, Mr. Trump spent much of his time telling supporters that Iran might have been behind the two assassination attempts against him, though U.S. officials have said there is no evidence to link them to Iranian threats.
Mr. Zelensky had requested a meeting with Mr. Trump in addition to meetings at the White House, but so far, the former president has been noncommittal.
At his event on Wednesday, Mr. Trump spent several minutes discussing the war in Ukraine, criticizing Mr. Zelensky for “making little nasty aspersions” about him, and musing aloud that he did not understand why the Ukrainians did not cede territory to the Russian invaders.
“If they made a bad deal, it would’ve been much better,” Mr. Trump said. “They would’ve given up a little bit and everybody would be living and every building would be built and every tower would be aging for another 2,000 years.”
What voters might end up taking away from the dueling events is not much about policy but about the differing personalities of the candidates, said Suzanne Maloney, the vice president and director of the foreign policy program at the Brookings Institution.
“There have simply been fewer opportunities to engage in serious reflections around their approach to the world and specific remedies they propose for the tough international challenges,” she said.
And, according to recent polls, foreign policy is not what will drive votes. In a national poll conducted by The New York Times and Siena College in early September, just 3 percent of likely voters said foreign policy decisions would influence their vote, compared with 22 percent who said the economy would be a deciding factor, 15 percent who said the same about abortion, and 12 percent who said immigration policy would drive their decision-making.
“Voters typically base their decisions on issues closer to home, especially those policies that impact their pocketbooks,” Ms. Maloney said.
Zolan Kanno-Youngs contributed reporting.
Jess Bidgood
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:02 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Jess Bidgood
Democrats seek another opening in a challenging Senate map.
Image
The U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C.
Democrats are hoping to keep their Senate majority by defeating incumbent Republicans in Florida and Texas.Credit...Eric Lee/The New York Times
Facing an uphill battle to maintain control of the Senate, Democrats are turning to two states that perennially break their hearts: Texas and Florida.
The retirement of Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, a Democrat-turned-independent, means one red-state Senate seat the party held for years is all but gone. Public polls show Senator Jon Tester of Montana trailing his Republican opponent in a state that has swung further to the right since he last won re-election. And Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio has a tough re-election battle in a state Donald J. Trump, then the president, won in 2020 by eight percentage points.
On Thursday, the party’s Senate campaign arm announced that it was making a “multimillion-dollar” investment in television advertising in two red states where it is holding out hope of defeating two Republican incumbents, Senators Ted Cruz of Texas and Rick Scott of Florida.
That Democrats are turning to states with long records of tantalizing them before letting them down can be read either as a sign of hope — maybe, just maybe, this year will be different — or of concern about the rest of the map. Picking up a seat in either state could help the party offset a loss elsewhere, although Democratic officials insisted that’s not the reason for the spending.
“This is about Democrats going on offense and expanding the map,” said David Bergstein, a spokesman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, adding that Senate Democrats have long sensed opportunity in Texas and Florida “given the weak standing of the Republican incumbents in both states.”
“We began making investments in the state to prepare for this kind of moment in 2023, and now we’ve reached a point in the campaign cycle where we’re accelerating our offensive efforts,” Mr. Bergstein added.
The committee has previously included both states in tranches of spending on advertising, making voter contacts, and staffing in the Senate battlegrounds. An aide to the committee who was not authorized to speak on the subject said the new spending in Texas and Florida would not alter its spending plans in other states.
Still, Republicans cast the move as a cry for help.
“This is effectively an admission from Chuck Schumer and the D.S.C.C. that Jon Tester, who is polling very badly, looks like a lost cause,” said Philip Letsou, the deputy communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, referring to Mr. Schumer, the senator from New York and the majority leader.
Jessica Taylor, the Senate campaigns editor for the Cook Political Report, which recently changed its rating for Mr. Tester’s race from “tossup” to leaning Republican, said the uphill battle in Montana means Democrats need to find an “insurance policy” anywhere they can.
“Montana and Ohio are just very, very difficult,” Ms. Taylor said. “They cannot take their foot off the gas anywhere.”
Both states are places where Democrats have drawn painfully close to winning in recent years.
In 2018, former Representative Beto O’Rourke lost to Mr. Cruz by 2.6 percentage points in a race that cost more than $100 million and dashed the hopes of Democrats around the country.
This time, Mr. Cruz faces Representative Colin Allred, a Dallas congressman and former N.F.L. linebacker, in a race that Texas Republicans have begun to describe as “too close for comfort.” Mr. Allred has made reproductive rights a key theme of his campaign in a state with strict limits on abortion, and he has released campaign ads knocking Mr. Cruz for, among other things, vacationing in Cancun during a crippling winter storm in 2021.
In Florida, Mr. Scott is facing a challenge from former Representative Debbie Mucarsel-Powell, who represented part of Southern Florida. In 2018, Mr. Scott squeaked into office with a victory of about 10,000 votes, and Democrats are hoping that voters who turn out for a statewide referendum on abortion rights might vote for Ms. Mucarsel-Powell, too.
“This is a one-point game,” Nikki Fried, the chair of Florida’s Democratic Party, said in a statement, calling Mr. Scott both vulnerable and unpopular. “With this investment, Florida has a fighting chance to defeat him in November.”
Whether or not the spending helps either candidate notch an upset, it could head off complaints that national Democrats are ignoring candidates of color in winnable races, which is something the party was accused of doing when it invested little in Senate races in North Carolina and Florida during the 2022 midterm elections.
Katie Rogers
Sept. 26, 2024, 4:00 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Katie Rogers
Neither Harris nor Zelensky took questions from reporters in a joint appearance that lasted about nine minutes. The appearance is a sign that President Biden’s administration is positioning her to take over a politically fraught diplomatic relationship that has dominated much of his time in office.
Katie Rogers
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:58 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Katie Rogers
In her remarks, the vice president is drawing a subtle contrast between the Biden-Harris administration’s approach to the conflict — “standing with our friends and defending our ideals against tyranny” — and the views espoused by her competitor, former President Donald J. Trump. “The United States cannot and should not isolate ourselves from the rest of the world,” she said. “Isolation is not insulation.”
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:54 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Harris is now taking aim at those in the Ukraine skeptics in the United States, who believe Zelensky should surrender territory to Putin. “Let us be clear, they are not proposals of peace. Instead they are proposals of surrender,” Harris said.
Image
Credit...Erin Schaff/The New York Times
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:54 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Harris’s aides have pointed to her many diplomatic trips overseas, including meetings with Zelensky during the Munich Security Conference, as proof of ability to serve as commander in chief.
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:52 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Harris repeates her line that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has violated “international rules and norms.” The vice president has always preferred that line to Biden’s favorite description that the United States was in a fight for “democracy versus autocracy.” Harris always thought it was too binary; a number of U.S. allies are autocracies. She prefers to see foreign affairs through her legal background.
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:50 p.m. ET1 hour ago
Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Vice President Kamala Harris and President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine are giving joint remarks in Washington. Harris says that “we must stand with our allies and partners. We must defend our Democratic values.” She repeats a familiar line: “We must stand for international rules and norms.”
Theodore Schleifer
Sept. 26, 2024, 3:10 p.m. ET2 hours ago
Theodore Schleifer
Senator JD Vance will return next month to Silicon Valley, where he spent some formative years of his career. An invitation just sent my way shows Vance headed to Woodside, Calif., on Oct. 9. This will be Vance’s second fundraising trip to the Bay Area since he joined the ticket. Trump himself headlined a fundraiser in Woodside earlier this month.
Alexandra Berzon
Sept. 26, 2024, 2:37 p.m. ET2 hours ago
Alexandra Berzon
The R.N.C. asked a conspiracy theorist to train poll watchers. Here’s what he told them.
Image
Jack Posobiec is speaking into a microphone he is holding in his right hand.
Jack Posobiec, who helped spread a conspiracy theory about Democrats running a satanic child abuse ring, was invited by the Republican National Committee this month to speak to a group of volunteers about how to monitor elections in Michigan.Credit...Rebecca Noble for The New York Times
A few years ago, Jack Posobiec was a fringe figure and a right-wing agitator best known for helping spread “Pizzagate,” a conspiracy theory about Democrats running a satanic child abuse ring underneath a Washington pizza parlor.
This month, he was invited by the Republican National Committee to speak to a group of volunteers about how to monitor elections in Michigan.
The invitation was one sign of how the party uses figures and fictions that were once considered out of bounds to energize its activists. The counsel that Mr. Posobiec delivered was another.
He blasted elections in the Democratic stronghold of Philadelphia, for example, joking that officials in Venezuela learned how to conduct their elections, widely seen as corrupt, by visiting the city and studying how it is done, according to a recording of the Sept. 4 meeting obtained by The New York Times.
The key to elections, he said, is that “it doesn’t matter who votes. It matters who counts the votes.”
Both Republican and Democratic groups have long dispatched such monitors to polling places, typically with instructions to report problems with equipment, long lines or any other issues. Democrats generally emphasize issues related to restrictions on voting and Republicans look out for voter fraud.
In recent years, after Donald J. Trump’s attempts to subvert the 2020 election, Republican monitor roles are increasingly being filled by activists who believe elections are fraudulent, and they have taken on a different mission.
Mr. Posobiec told the group they were the “final line of defense against the encroaching Marxism.”
“We’ve already seen the Marxism start creeping in. It’s already begun. The question is, are we going to let them finish the job or not?”
A spokeswoman for the Republican National Committee did not respond to a request for comment. After Mr. Posobiec spoke, a party official leading the training struck a different tone. She explained the precise role of poll monitors and urged the volunteers to be respectful, polite and careful about following the rules.
This year, the party has frequently used popular politicians and media figures to draw in volunteers to participate in its poll-watching programs.
Since 2016, Mr. Posobiec has emerged as a well-known internet influencer with around 2.7 million followers on X. In his recent book, “Unhumans: The Secret History of Communist Revolutions (and How to Crush Them),” written with Joshua Lisec, Mr. Posobiec wrote about people involved with Black Lives Matter and the Civil Rights Movement as being part of a series of left-wing efforts to destroy civilization. (Mr. Trump’s running mate, Senator JD Vance of Ohio, wrote a blurb endorsing the book.)
In addition to the Michigan training, Mr. Posobiec was also scheduled to speak to a group in Wisconsin a few days later.
In a statement, Mr. Posobiec stood by his comments at the training session.
“I am proud to volunteer my time appearing at a poll watcher training for hard-working Americans who want to ensure the integrity of this election and that our election officials are held accountable to enforce the very laws that, when followed, inspire greater trust in our democratic institutions,” he said.
A spokesman added that Mr. Posobiec has since called Pizzagate a hoax and that he generally seeks to express political humor and satire.
Others who have participated in recent training sessions include Kari Lake, the party’s Senate candidate in Arizona and former candidate for governor who never conceded her defeat. Also invited was Rogan O’Handley, a social media influencer who uses the handle DC Draino and often spreads misinformation about “rigged” elections, and Colby Covington, an Ultimate Fighting Championship star who calls himself “Donald Trump’s favorite fighter.”
For decades, the R.N.C. was sharply limited in its ability to organize poll monitoring by a federal consent decree it signed to resolve accusations of voter intimidation. The decree, which was put in place in 1982, was lifted in 2018.
In 2022, thousands of election officials and observers were recruited from among a network of activists motivated by Mr. Trump’s falsehoods about the 2020 election.
Despite concerns that the activists might disrupt the vote count or encourage bogus legal challenges, the 2022 elections went off largely smoothly — among high-profile races, the only contested result was Ms. Lake’s defeat.
Election officials have raised worries again this year now that Mr. Trump is at the top of the Republican ticket. The former president has repeatedly spread falsehoods about the election system, suggested that local election officials are breaking the law and that individual citizens must guard the vote from forces out to steal it.
The R.N.C. leadership, which was replaced by Mr. Trump this year, has also vowed to be far more aggressive in challenging election laws and voter rolls.
At the training in Michigan, Mr. Posobiec implored volunteers to look out for issues that could be publicized more widely or taken up by lawyers.
“You need to think of yourself as the ground forces, as the army that’s going be out there, the eyes and the ears of the Trump campaign, of the Republican Party, that are there on the front line to say, we are going to catch you and when we catch you we’re going to make a stink about it,” Mr. Posobiec said. “We want to get the truth out and the truth will always set us free in these instances.”
Tim Balk
Sept. 26, 2024, 2:00 p.m. ET3 hours ago
Tim Balk
A Democratic consultant behind robocalls that used A.I. to mimic President Biden’s voice to urge New Hampshire voters to sit out the primary has been fined $6 million by the Federal Communications Commission, the agency said. Steven Kramer, who has acknowledged a role in the robocalls, has been separately charged with voter suppression in a state case. He said in a statement that “fining operatives is not a solution” and urged the F.C.C. to prevent A.I. from being used in the first place.
Sept. 26, 2024, 1:31 p.m. ET4 hours ago
Jonathan Swan, Maggie Haberman and Shane Goldmacher
A pro-Trump super PAC is expanding its ad buy by $70 million in four battleground states.
Image
A crowd of Trump supporters stand waving blue and white signs reading “Trump Vance Make America Great Again! 2024.”
Supporters waited for Donald J. Trump to arrive at a rally in Indiana, Pa., on Monday. A pro-Trump super PAC is focusing on the state with television and digital ads. Credit...Maddie McGarvey for The New York Times
One of the biggest super PACs supporting former President Donald J. Trump is adding $70 million to its television and digital reservations in the final six weeks of the campaign, including the first significant Republican super PAC ad buy in North Carolina since Labor Day.
The super PAC, MAGA Inc., is pouring the funds into four battleground states — North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Georgia and Arizona. The $70 million comes on top of $30 million in pre-existing ad buys by the group, for a total spending of $100 million in the final stage of the race.
Most of the group’s money is going into Pennsylvania, officials at the super PAC said. The former president’s advisers and allies believe that a Trump win in Pennsylvania would block Vice President Kamala Harris’s path to the White House.
But the spending in North Carolina reflects what has become a more competitive race there.
The super PAC plans to run crime-focused ads designed to portray Ms. Harris as a radical leftist, according to officials at the group. They will use examples of her record as a prosecutor in San Francisco to make the case that she is soft on crime. It’s a strategy Republicans have reliably used since the Nixon era.
Ms. Harris has been highlighting her record as a prosecutor, in part in an effort to blunt voters’ concerns about her being too liberal, according to two people with direct knowledge of her approach, who were not authorized to discuss the strategy publicly.
Trump allies have been anxious to prevent Ms. Harris from successfully distancing herself from her past liberal positions — particularly those she took as a presidential candidate in 2019 — and selling herself as the “change” candidate.
The Trump forces are trying to ensure that voters associate her with incumbency, and especially with President Biden. The super PAC plans to continue an effort to yoke Ms. Harris to the most unpopular parts of Mr. Biden’s record, to try to make voters feel she is equally responsible.
Officials at MAGA Inc. are coordinating with other pro-Trump super PACs.
Preserve America, a super PAC funded by the billionaire Miriam Adelson, is focused on Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. It has nearly $30 million in television ad reservations in those two states, according to records from AdImpact. And Right for America — a super PAC steered by Sergio Gor, an ally of Mr. Trump, and seeded in part by Ike Perlmutter, the billionaire former chief executive of Marvel Entertainment — has recently made a $40 million advertising reservation between now and Election Day.
The Trump campaign itself has been running ads attacking Ms. Harris for higher prices. The ads include clips of her praising “Bidenomics” as effective. But the paid messages have often been drowned out by Mr. Trump’s undisciplined speeches and debate riffs, including the airing of baseless rumors, such as his claims that Haitian migrants in Ohio are eating people’s pets.
Ms. Harris has an enormous financial advantage over Mr. Trump. Her main super PAC, Future Forward, began reserving its $250 million fall ad buy last winter. One of the goals of groups like MAGA Inc. is to make last-minute ad buys so that the final few weeks of the campaign are as evenly matched as possible.
Image
Kamala Harris stands at an open airplane door preparing to walk down the plane’s red steps.
As the 2024 presidential race enters its final weeks, Vice President Kamala Harris has an enormous financial advantage over Mr. Trump. Credit...Kenny Holston/The New York Times
MAGA Inc. is spending much of its money on so-called persuadable voters in the battleground states. These are undecided voters — roughly three million people in seven battleground states — whose allegiances are up for grabs. The super PAC is echoing the Trump campaign’s testosterone-fueled strategy, zeroing in on men aged 18 to 44. The group is buying advertising on streaming services, including YouTube TV, with a focus on live sports like the N.F.L., college football and Major League Baseball.
The super PAC’s new investment in North Carolina shows how much Ms. Harris has transformed the race.
Before Mr. Biden dropped out on July 21, Trump allies didn’t imagine they’d have to spend millions of dollars in North Carolina. The state was closely fought for in 2020 — Mr. Trump won by only 70,000 votes — but Mr. Trump had opened up a solid lead there against Mr. Biden earlier this year. Instead of competing to flip North Carolina, the Biden team had been forced into worrying about defending states that should have been safe for a Democrat, such as Virginia and Minnesota.
Future Forward, the Democratic super PAC, has small ad buys reserved in the final days of the race in blue states, including Minnesota and New Hampshire, in case those states emerge as unexpectedly competitive.
But since entering the race and quickly securing the nomination, Ms. Harris has tightened the gap in North Carolina to the point where she and Mr. Trump are polling within the margin of error. Ms. Harris has strong support from Black and college-educated voters in the state. She has also been helped by the scandal surrounding the Republican candidate for governor, Mark Robinson. Democrats have been running ads showing Mr. Trump as he praised Mr. Robinson, who, in addition to being linked by a CNN report to disturbing comments on a pornographic website, has staked out hard-line positions on abortion.
If Ms. Harris wins North Carolina, it’s hard to see how Mr. Trump could win the election. Mr. Trump’s advisers see their clearest path to the presidency in holding North Carolina and then adding wins in Pennsylvania and Georgia. Only one Democratic presidential candidate has won North Carolina this century: Barack Obama in 2008.
In a memo sent to allies on Tuesday, the senior officials at MAGA Inc., David Lee and Chris Grant, shared highlights of their internal polling. They said that in 42 separate statewide surveys in the seven battleground states since Mr. Biden quit the race, Mr. Trump “has led or tied in 40 of them” and trailed twice in Wisconsin by one percentage point or less.
Mr. Lee and Mr. Grant added that in their polling, Mr. Trump had never trailed in Arizona, Nevada, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Michigan or Georgia since Ms. Harris became the nominee. Those results are more favorable to Mr. Trump than some recent public polls. Those polls show Ms. Harris leading Mr. Trump in some of these states.
Theodore Schleifer
Sept. 26, 2024, 12:41 p.m. ET4 hours ago
Theodore Schleifer
The post-debate schedule for Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota is beginning to take shape. A few days after his vice-presidential debate with Senator JD Vance of Ohio, he’ll be in Vance’s home state, dropping into Cleveland for a fund-raiser on Oct. 5, according to a copy of the invitation.
Katie Rogers
Sept. 26, 2024, 11:44 a.m. ET5 hours ago
Katie Rogers
Katie Rogers is a White House reporter who covered the Trump administration and wrote a book on modern first ladies, including Melania Trump.
Melania Trump gave a rare interview. Here are three takeaways.
Image
Melania Trump in a red jacket.
Melania Trump has almost always defended her husband.Credit...Haiyun Jiang for The New York Times
Melania Trump, the former first lady, said that she blamed “leaders from the opposition party and the mainstream media” for creating conditions that led to two assassination attempts against former President Donald J. Trump.
In an interview with Ainsley Earhardt of Fox News that aired on Thursday morning — the first such media appearance the press-averse Mrs. Trump has made in over two years — she echoed what her husband has said about the attempts, without the sort of harsh language he has used.
Mrs. Trump, who is promoting a memoir, is intensely private. Even as first lady, her public appearances were sporadic and she lived a life that kept her largely ensconced from outside scrutiny. Her post-White House life has been similarly isolated, a reality that came through in the interview.
She has been largely absent from the campaign trail and was not near her husband during both recent attempts on his life. After a man with a gun was detained while her husband was playing golf at his Florida club on Sept. 15, Mrs. Trump, who was in New York City, called to make sure Mr. Trump was safe “as soon as I saw it on television.”
And she said a second presidency for Mr. Trump would not be disruptive beyond his presence on social media. “Maybe some, you know, strong tweets. But everything else great for this country,” she said at one point.
Here are a few takeaways from her interview.
She defended Trump’s record while being both vague and selective about the details.
Mrs. Trump, asked about her reaction to Vice President Kamala Harris replacing President Biden as the Democratic presidential nominee, said that her husband’s record spoke for itself.
“My husband as commander in chief, he was leading the country through peace, through strength,” Mrs. Trump said, speaking vaguely and without specifics about what her husband’s administration had accomplished. By contrast, she claimed, “the country is suffering” under Mr. Biden. “People are not able to buy usual necessities for the families.”
She argued that under Mr. Trump, the United States had prospered and “didn’t have any wars,” echoing several claims her husband has made, particularly about the relative lack of military conflicts abroad during his presidency.
By the end of Mr. Trump’s term, nearly 13,000 U.S. troops were stationed in Afghanistan. Records show that at least 65 active-duty troops died in hostile action during his presidency, partly as a result of the Trump administration’s efforts to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
Mrs. Trump also made a glaring omission in her recounting of the Trump years: a coronavirus pandemic that devastated the American economy and led to hundreds of thousands of deaths before Mr. Trump lost the 2020 election.
She also made it clear how she feels about Mr. Trump’s decision to run for another term: “I support him.”
Both Trumps blame others for political strife.
Mrs. Trump rarely speaks publicly, but when she does, she almost always defends Mr. Trump’s incendiary approach to politics, claiming, as she did Thursday, that his behavior represents “strong” leadership.
In the interview, she condemned the attempts on Mr. Trump’s life, and said that she had not been watching on television when a gunman opened fire at a rally on July 13, but eventually reached her husband by phone and was assured by his Secret Service detail that he would survive. “I think something was watching over him,” Mrs. Trump said. “It’s almost like country really needs him.”
She said that she had written a “beautiful letter” calling for an end to the violence after that episode: “Let us reunite. Now,” she wrote at the time. She said she had declined to speak at the Republican National Convention because “in one way, the letter was my speech.”
But on Fox, Mrs. Trump blamed who she thought was the source of the strife.
“Is it really shocking that all this egregious violence goes against my husband, especially that we hear the leaders from the opposition party and mainstream media branding him as a threat to democracy, calling him vile names,” she said. “They only fueling a toxic atmosphere and giving power all of these people that they want to do harm to him. This needs to stop. This needs to stop. The country needs to unite.”
So far, it’s a book tour without many book details.
It is possible that Mrs. Trump’s memoir, titled “Melania,” will be filled with specifics, including about what she saw after Mar-a-Lago, the Palm Beach, Fla., home she shares with her husband, was searched by F.B.I. agents. The book may reveal her thoughts about the wives of the many world leaders she encountered during her time as first lady. She might tell her readers more about what Mr. Trump is like in private.
When Ms. Earhardt raised those questions in the interview, though, Mrs. Trump chose to be circumspect over teasing what might actually be in the book.
Asked to reveal what she saw after the F.B.I. searched her home, the former first lady kept her answer general and called it an invasion of privacy.
“I saw unpleasant stuff that nobody wants to see it,” Mrs. Trump said. “And you get angry because, you know, nobody should be putting up with that kind of stuff. Some person — I don’t even know who or how many people — they, you know, they went through my stuff.”
And she said that people who do not like her husband do not understand that Mr. Trump is a “family man” who enjoys listening to music — “He likes to be the DJ.”
She was light on other examples.
Lisa Lerer
Sept. 26, 2024, 11:42 a.m. ET5 hours ago
Lisa Lerer
the ad campaign
Inside a pro-Harris ad portraying Trump as fighting for billionaires like him.
Image
Credit...Harris for President
Future Forward, the main super PAC backing Kamala Harris’s presidential campaign, is running this 30-second ad, “Fight for Us,” on television stations in Arizona, Georgia, Michigan and Pennsylvania this week at a cost of $3.5 million, according to AdImpact.
Here’s a look at the ad, its accuracy and its major takeaway.
On the Screen
The ad opens on a shot of a middle-aged white woman with a concerned expression on her face. She’s the narrator, and she identifies herself as a teacher. She is shown in her kitchen, unpacking groceries and looking at the receipt, opening her mail while seated at her dining table, and briefly speaking to the camera.
Video clips show the billionaires Elon Musk, in white tie, and Jeff Bezos followed by Donald J. Trump, both in black tie. Mr. Trump is then seen in a grainy video clip addressing a group of donors from a lectern at his Mar-a-Lago club, and, under the headline “Trump,” his words are subtitled: “I know 20 of you and you’re rich as hell,” and, “We are going to give you tax cuts.”
From there, the ad spins through clips of Ms. Harris giving a speech — “Kamala Harris: cut taxes for working people,” the first of several headlines mirroring the narration says — and greeting different kinds of American workers: in hard hats and bright yellow safety vests, in a kitchen, at an electrical workers’ union and elsewhere.
As Mr. Trump is seen in white golfing attire and a white “Make America Great Again” baseball cap, gold type tees up the ad’s conclusion: “Trump fights for billionaires like him.” And white type drives it home: “Kamala Harris fights for working people.”
Credit...Harris for President
The Script
Narrator
“No one becomes a teacher to get rich. But there are times when I’ve really struggled to get by. It makes me so mad that billionaires pay less in taxes than I do. I don’t want to pay more while they pay less. And Trump wants to give them even more breaks.”
Mr. Trump
“I know about 20 of you, and you’re rich as hell.”
Mr. Trump
“We are going to give you tax cuts —”
Narrator
“Kamala Harris will cut taxes for working people. And she’ll lower everyday costs by taking on price gouging. Trump fights for billionaires like him. Kamala fights for us.”
Accuracy
The ad makes no verifiable claims.
The Takeaway
Mr. Trump has long held an advantage on the economy, with many voters blaming the Biden administration for elevated housing and grocery prices. While inflation has fallen to more typical levels in recent months, many families are still struggling to adjust to prices that remain higher than prepandemic levels.
As the economy has improved, Ms. Harris has cut into Mr. Trump’s edge on the issue. This ad is an effort to expand those gains by casting the former president as more focused on enriching himself and his rich friends than ordinary American workers. It’s a message Democrats believe will resonate with swing voters who have expressed concerns over Mr. Trump’s temperament and character.
Tim Balk
Sept. 26, 2024, 11:11 a.m. ET6 hours ago
Tim Balk
Rudolph Giuliani has been disbarred from the practice of law in Washington, D.C., an appeals court said Thursday. Giuliani, the former New York City mayor who helped lead Donald Trump’s legal crusade to overturn the 2020 presidential election, was disbarred in New York in July. His spokesman, Ted Goodman, said in a statement that the decision in Washington was “politically motivated” and a “miscarriage of justice.”
Jonathan Weisman
Sept. 26, 2024, 10:58 a.m. ETSept. 26, 2024
Jonathan Weisman
The inclusion of Florida and Texas in the Democratic Senatorial Committee’s new advertising and ground-game announcement can be seen as a sign of either confidence or fear. With the Republican challenger Tim Sheehy gaining the upper hand in his race to unseat Senator Jon Tester in Montana, Democrats may need to beat a Republican incumbent to have a chance at keeping Senate control. The Democrats’ official Senate campaign opted Thursday to throw millions behind Debbie Mucarsel-Powell in Florida, hoping to beat Senator Rick Scott, and Colin Allred in Texas, aiming at Senator Ted Cruz.
Michael Gold
Sept. 26, 2024, 10:47 a.m. ETSept. 26, 2024
Michael Gold
Donald Trump will “deliver remarks to the press” at Trump Tower this afternoon, his campaign just announced. He has no other scheduled campaign events for the day.
Neil Vigdor
Sept. 26, 2024, 8:22 a.m. ETSept. 26, 2024
Neil Vigdor
Georgia’s Supreme Court disqualified Cornel West and Claudia De la Cruz, two long-shot presidential candidates, from having votes counted for them in the November election. In a ruling on Wednesday, the court concluded that both had failed to follow the state’s procedures for submitting nominating petitions, an oversight that Democrats had brought to officials’ attention.
Neil Vigdor
Sept. 26, 2024, 8:23 a.m. ETSept. 26, 2024
Neil Vigdor
Their names will still appear on ballots in Georgia, a key battleground, where state election officials said it was too late to remove them because the papers had already been printed. Georgia’s secretary of state will post notices at polling places and accompanying absentee ballots saying that votes for either candidate won’t count.
Katie Glueck
Sept. 26, 2024, 8:00 a.m. ETSept. 26, 2024
Katie Glueck
Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota, Vice President Kamala Harris’s running mate, is expected to attend the football game between the University of Michigan and the University of Minnesota on Saturday in Ann Arbor, Mich., a campaign official said. The official spoke on the condition of anonymity to preview plans for Walz’s trip to a critical battleground.
Reid J. Epstein
Sept. 25, 2024, 9:28 p.m. ETSept. 25, 2024
Reid J. Epstein
Reid J. Epstein covers Kamala Harris’s presidential campaign. He reported from Washington.
Here are three takeaways from Kamala Harris’s interview on MSNBC.
Image
Kamala Harris smiling as she walks to Air Force Two.
Vice President Kamala Harris has tended to choose friendly venues for interviews, and has focused heavily on local news outlets or nontraditional news sources. Credit...Erin Schaff/The New York Times
As Vice President Kamala Harris parses out the details of her agenda, she has favored broad strokes over detailed policy papers. Only recently has she begun sitting for interviews, which have elicited few details about what her presidential administration might look like.
Little about that careful approach changed during a 25-minute interview with Stephanie Ruhle of MSNBC that was broadcast on Wednesday night. It was Ms. Harris’s first one-on-one interview on cable television since becoming the Democratic nominee.
In her discussion with a friendly interviewer, the vice president again presented herself as a champion of the middle class and hit many of the same themes from her pro-business economic speech earlier in the day. She largely avoided direct questions about how she would govern and why some voters remain fond of former President Donald J. Trump’s stewardship of the economy.
Here are three takeaways from Ms. Harris’s interview.
Harris had roundabout answers to open-ended questions.
Ms. Ruhle’s first question was about how Ms. Harris might respond to people who hear her proposals and say, “These policies aren’t for me.” The MSNBC host’s second was about why voters tend to tell pollsters that Mr. Trump is better equipped to handle the economy.
Ms. Harris responded to the fairly basic and predictable questions with roundabout responses that did not provide a substantive answer.
Instead of offering any explanation for why Mr. Trump polls better on the economy — a matter that has vexed Democrats as President Biden has overseen a steadily improving economy — Ms. Harris instead blasted Mr. Trump’s record. She blamed him for a loss of manufacturing and autoworker jobs and said his tariff proposals would serve as an added sales tax on American consumers.
She said nothing about why voters think Mr. Trump and Republicans would be better on the economy.
But she did say her policies are for everyone.
“If you are hardworking, if you have the dreams and the ambitions and the aspirations of what I believe you do, you’re in my plan,” Ms. Harris said.
She avoided a looming scenario: What if Democrats lose the Senate?
Ms. Harris has been eagerly promoting the big-ticket items on her agenda. A middle-class tax cut, tax increases for the rich and for big corporations. More money for child care and health care.
Ms. Ruhle brought up the elephant in the room: How could any of this happen without Democratic control of the Senate?
This is a key question that hangs over the Harris campaign as Democrats increasingly fear Senator Jon Tester of Montana is in a perilous political situation. If he loses his re-election bid, Democrats would need to flip at least one Republican-held Senate seat to retain control of the chamber — an unlikely prospect given this year’s daunting map for the party.
Ms. Harris skated past Ms. Ruhle’s question about where Democrats would find the money for such proposals without addressing her party’s Senate prospects.
“But we’re going to have to raise corporate taxes,” she said. “We’re going to have to make sure that the biggest corporations and billionaires pay their fair share. That’s just it. It’s about paying their fair share. I am not mad at anyone for achieving success, but everyone should pay their fair share.”
That is an argument she may find herself making to very skeptical Senate Republicans next year if she wins the White House.
A hard-hitting Harris interview is still yet to come.
Since Ms. Harris began granting more interviews in recent days, her media strategy has been to sit with friendly inquisitors who are not inclined to ask terribly thorny questions or press her when her responses are evasive.
Nothing about that changed during her interview with Ms. Ruhle before her audience on MSNBC, the liberal cable channel whose viewers overwhelmingly favor Democratic candidates.
It’s not quite clear what Ms. Harris gained, aside from giving her campaign aides the ability to say she held a one-on-one cable television interview.
For the vice president, speaking with Ms. Ruhle was roughly in the same ballpark as Mr. Trump having one of his regular chats with Sean Hannity of Fox News.
Last week, Ms. Ruhle openly showed her preference for Ms. Harris over Mr. Trump during an appearance on Bill Maher’s HBO program. And when she interviewed Mr. Biden in May 2023, Ms. Ruhle did not press him after his stumbling answers and praised him throughout the 14-minute discussion.
So it went with Ms. Harris. Ms. Ruhle joined Ms. Harris in attacking Mr. Trump (“His plan is not serious, when you lay it out like that”) and avoided posing tricky questions about positions Ms. Harris supported during her 2020 presidential campaign or what, if anything, she knew about Mr. Biden’s physical condition or mental acuity as his own campaign deteriorated.
Which is perhaps why Ms. Harris agreed to the interview in the first place.
Simon J. Levien
Sept. 25, 2024, 8:36 p.m. ETSept. 25, 2024
Simon J. Levien
Rep. Clay Higgins posts, then deletes, racist comments about Haitians.
Image
Representative Clay Higgins, Republican of Louisiana, sits in a chair as he holds papers during a House hearing. In front of him are a microphone and a nameplate reading “Mr. Higgins.”
Representative Clay Higgins, Republican of Louisiana, at the Capitol, last year.Credit...Kenny Holston/The New York Times
Representative Clay Higgins, Republican of Louisiana, advanced racist claims about Haitians in a post on social media that was subsequently deleted on Wednesday.
Mr. Higgins’s post on X was a response to an Associated Press article about a court filing by the leader of the Haitian Bridge Alliance, a nonprofit group. The group invoked a citizen’s right to file charges against former President Donald J. Trump and Senator JD Vance of Ohio, his running mate, for knowingly making false claims about Haitian migrants in Springfield, Ohio, that caused panic, the filing said.
Mr. Higgins repeated some of those claims in his post on X.
“These Haitians are wild. Eating pets, vudu, nastiest country in the western hemisphere, cults, slapstick gangsters,” he wrote.
“But damned if they don’t feel all sophisticated now, filing charges against our President and VP. All these thugs better get their mind right and their ass out of our country before January 20th,” Mr. Higgins continued, referring to the date of the presidential inauguration.
Mr. Trump has pledged, if elected, to “get them the hell out,” referring to migrants in Springfield, most of whom are in the United States legally and have filled jobs in local industry.
Mr. Higgins’s post appears to have been deleted after he faced backlash. Democrats seized on his post. Representative Hakeem Jeffries of New York, the House minority leader, said in a statement that Mr. Higgins “must be held accountable for dishonorable conduct that is unbecoming of a member of Congress.”
Representative Steven Horsford, Democrat of Nevada and the chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, said he would make a motion to censure Mr. Higgins for bringing “disgrace” to Congress.
A reporter asked the House speaker, Mike Johnson, Republican of Louisiana, about Mr. Higgins’s post in a news conference on Wednesday. Mr. Johnson said the congressman had “prayed about it, and he regretted it, and he pulled the post down.”
A spokeswoman for Mr. Higgins did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But Mr. Higgins told CNN later on Wednesday that he stood by his post.
Some Republicans have recently supported baseless claims that Haitian migrants in Springfield were stealing and eating their neighbors’ pets. Mr. Trump gave these falsehoods a national platform by advancing them onstage during the presidential debate this month.
In the days and weeks following, many residents have said these accusations have brought undue attention to the southwestern Ohio city. Springfield has faced a wave of bomb threats and threatening messages to its Haitian community.
Mr. Vance previously said he stood by debunked claims about Springfield, though he added that he was willing “to create stories so that the American media actually pays attention.”
Subodh Chandra, a lawyer representing the Haitian Bridge Alliance, and its director, Guerline Jozef, condemned Mr. Higgins’s post as “the trumpeting of a clear threat,” and suggested that the representative face an ethics investigation.
“All the hate does is cause more distress and fear,” Mr. Chandra said in an interview.
Mr. Higgins is a member of the House committees on homeland security and oversight, including a subcommittee on national security and the southern border.
Donald Trump Jr., Mr. Trump’s son, piled on with racist comments this month, baselessly suggesting that Haitians who come to the United States have low intelligence, in an interview on Real America’s Voice, a conservative broadcaster.
Several Haitian advocacy groups have also condemned the recent claims as false and racist.
Mattathias Schwartz contributed reporting.
Michael Gold
Sept. 25, 2024, 7:52 p.m. ETSept. 25, 2024
Michael Gold
Trump will rally again in Butler, Pa., the site of the first assassination attempt against him.
Image
Law enforcement officers walking across grass in front of a stage, bleachers and chairs. A large American flag waves above them.
Law enforcement officers surveying the scene after the shooting at former President Donald Trump’s campaign rally in Butler, Pa., in July.Credit...Eric Lee/The New York Times
Former President Donald J. Trump will return to Butler, Pa., on Oct. 5, holding a rally at the same site where he survived an assassination attempt in July, his campaign announced on Wednesday.
Mr. Trump’s return to Butler, where he was grazed by a gunman’s bullet in a shooting that also killed one man and injured two others, will take place exactly one month before Election Day.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly said he would return to Butler. Just weeks after the shooting, he wrote in a post on Truth Social that he planned to return for a “BIG AND BEAUTIFUL RALLY” that would honor Corey Comperatore, a volunteer firefighter and father of two who was fatally shot after throwing himself over his family members to shield them from bullets.
Image
A sign saying Remember Corey Comperatore stands next to a chain-link fence surrounding a field.
Mr. Trump has pledged that the rally will honor Corey Comperatore, a local firefighter and rally-goer who was killed in the shooting at his rally in Butler on July 13.Credit...Kristian Thacker for The New York Times
The Secret Service has recently faced significant questions about its operations, including how the shooter was able to climb onto a warehouse and fire eight rounds at Mr. Trump. The assassination attempt was the first shooting of a current or former president since 1981.
And with the Secret Service already under intense scrutiny, Mr. Trump faced another assassination attempt this month — at his golf course in West Palm Beach, Fla., where the Secret Service spotted a rifle barrel pointed toward where Mr. Trump was playing.
Though little remains known about what motivated the shooter in Butler, the former president has portrayed himself as a political near-martyr. He has claimed at times that Democratic rhetoric motivated the assassination attempt, while at others suggesting that the shooting had ties to other countries unhappy with his policies.
In a speech on Wednesday in North Carolina, Mr. Trump suggested that the shooting in Butler was linked to continuing threats against him from Iran, even as officials have stressed that there is no evidence to link the two.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump often marvels at how close he came to being more seriously injured. His supporters and his campaign have embraced images of Mr. Trump immediately after the shooting, bloodied and raising his fist triumphantly, as a symbol of their political movement. And his words to the crowd of his supporters after the episode — “Fight, fight, fight!” — have become a rallying cry.
Mr. Trump’s second rally in Butler will most likely have a similar setup to the one in July, and the venue — the grounds of the Butler Farm Show — will be the same. But since the shooting, Mr. Trump now stands behind what appears to be protective ballistic glass when he holds rallies outdoors.

Keep Up With the 2024 Election
The presidential election is 41 days away. Here’s our guide to the run-up to Election Day.
Tracking the Polls. The state of the race, according to the latest polling data.
Map highlighting the most competitive states and districts in the presidential race.
Swing State Ratings. The presidential race is likely to be decided by these states.
Key Issues. Here’s where Kamala Harris and Donald Trump stand.
A calendar showing key dates and voting deadlines for the 2024 presidential election.
Election Calendar. Take a look at key dates and voting deadlines.
Career Timelines. See how the presidential and V.P. candidates got here.
On Politics Newsletter. Get the latest news and analysis on the 2024 election sent to your inbox. Sign up here.
Site Index
Site Information Navigation

    © 2024 The New York Times Company

    NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions

    Manage Privacy Preferences

0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
