The Hunt
Starting a New Chapter in the Twin Cities for Less Than $180,000

By Mitch Smith
Sept. 26, 2024

A recent retiree toured condos of all stripes in Minneapolis and St. Paul, looking for something he could get excited about. Here’s what he found.

Mark Dougherty wanted to buy a reasonably priced condominium in Minneapolis or St. Paul, Minn. He was willing to do some renovation work and preferred a two-bedroom, although he was open to a one-bedroom. Jenn Ackerman for The New York Times

Mark Dougherty spent years living in a condominium he bought from his mother in suburban Lilydale, Minn., outside the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul. He liked the place and was proud of his renovation efforts, but as he entered retirement he decided he wanted a less expensive home in a more active neighborhood.

“I need to shake up my life,” said Mr. Dougherty, 66, who spent a varied career in radio journalism, home remodeling and retail. He had lived for many years in and around the Twin Cities and their suburbs, but was especially drawn to Minneapolis, where he felt energized by the unique neighborhoods and vibrant gay culture.

[Did you recently buy a home? We want to hear from you. Email: thehunt@nytimes.com]

His home search played out in fits and starts over a few years, but it ramped up last winter, after his retirement became official. With a budget of up to about $180,000, Mr. Dougherty hoped to find a relatively small condo that was in decent shape, but he was willing to remodel and customize it. A two-bedroom apartment was preferable, although he was open to a one-bedroom, and he hoped for a place that had parking and a balcony.

“At this point in his life, he wanted to be able to be engaged with his surrounding neighborhood,” said Scott Belcher, a real estate agent with Re/Max Results. “He wasn’t especially looking to retire into a quiet neighborhood, but more of an area that would be energetic.”

Together, they toured Twin Cities homes that were in bustling areas with coffee shops and restaurants. Among the options:

No. 1

Streetside Patio in Minneapolis

This one-bedroom, one-bathroom, 785-square-foot condominium was in a five-unit 2006 building within walking distance of downtown Minneapolis. With a ground-level patio facing a busy street and a coffee shop on the same block, it had the urban energy that Mr. Dougherty was seeking. It was listed for $179,900, at the top of his budget, but it had in-unit laundry, new carpet, central air-conditioning and garage parking. The high ceilings and ample sunlight were positives, but Mr. Dougherty didn’t love the open floor plan, and some details were dated. The monthly homeowner association fee was about $330; annual property taxes were around $2,800.

No. 2

Building With Character in St. Paul

This one-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment in downtown St. Paul was 730 square feet, with a bedroom window framing the soaring white dome of the Minnesota State Capitol. The 1908 building was around the corner from the theater where the radio show “A Prairie Home Companion” had been recorded. The storage space, partially updated kitchen and terrazzo flooring caught Mr. Dougherty’s eye, but there was no central air, balcony, assigned parking or in-unit laundry. There was also no door separating the bedroom from the living area. And while the $137,500 asking price would leave plenty of room for renovations, the $600 monthly homeowner association fee was comparatively high. Annual property taxes were around $1,600.

No. 3

St. Paul Two-Bedroom With Amenities

This two-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment in St. Paul was in a large 1987 building with an indoor pool, sauna, gym and garage parking. It was about 800 square feet, with a balcony, central air, in-unit laundry, stainless steel appliances and the second bedroom that Mr. Dougherty wanted. The building was within walking distance of restaurants and museums, but he worried that the style was too similar to that of the suburban condo he was eager to leave. The $169,000 asking price was near the upper end of his budget; the monthly homeowner association fee was $840, and annual property taxes were about $3,000.

Which Would You Choose?

Streetside Patio in Minneapolis

HIS HOME:

Building With Character in St. Paul

Mr. Dougherty began his search convinced that Minneapolis was the place for him, and he thought seriously about the apartment there with the streetside patio, which was at the top of his budget. He loved that it came with parking, air-conditioning and laundry, but the floor plan felt stifling and parts of the unit were dated. He decided not to make an offer.

In general, the homes he saw in Minneapolis left him underwhelmed. Some buildings seemed to have fallen behind on maintenance.

“We’re looking around and just being disappointed by everything we’re finding in Minneapolis,” he recalled. “And finally, I did start looking at St. Paul listings.”

But before he spent his money, he had to be convinced that the smaller of the Twin Cities offered the excitement and conveniences he wanted. What he found there were busy sidewalks, an abundance of shops and restaurants, and homes he could afford in the heart of downtown.

He liked the apartment with lots of amenities. The second bedroom would have been useful, and the condo was in good shape. But the vibe wasn’t right. “I thought, ‘No, this is exactly like where I live now, and I could just stay up here for days at a time and never leave,’” he said.

When he walked into the one-bedroom with character in downtown St. Paul, about 10 miles east of central Minneapolis, he and Mr. Belcher knew it was the one.

“I said, ‘Mark, this is you. This is what you’ve been looking for,’” Mr. Belcher recalled.

Mr. Dougherty liked the architectural character of the building, and appreciated the unique touches in the apartment, especially the terrazzo flooring and plaster relief on the bedroom ceiling. He knew he would want to embark on some construction projects, especially in the kitchen and bathroom, but the lower price left plenty of room in the budget.

Although there was no assigned garage parking, rental parking was available nearby and reasonably priced. He knew he could buy a portable air-conditioner, and the building’s communal laundry made up for the absence of a washer and dryer in the apartment.

He offered the sellers $134,000, a little below the list price, and accepted their counteroffer of $135,000. He closed this spring and arrived in June.

The apartment already feels like home. He has hung art on the walls and keeps a window open on nice days, allowing the sounds of church bells and traffic to fill his home.

There’s plenty to do within walking distance. And he said he has joined the board of the homeowner association. Now he is making a mental list of renovation projects for his apartment — and the building’s common areas.

E-mail: thehunt@nytimes.com
