
Skip to content
Skip to site index
Well
SUBSCRIBE FOR $1/WEEK

This Disease Can Damage the Liver for Years Without Being Detected

Four in 10 people are thought to have a potentially serious liver condition known as MASLD. Reversing it is possible if you catch it early.
Listen to this article · 5:35 min Learn more

A doctor is shown holding a detailed model of a human liver in a medical setting.
Credit...Getty Images

By Nina Agrawal
Oct. 1, 2024
Leer en español

Geraldine Frank was looking forward to celebrating her 62nd birthday when her son noticed some yellowing in her eyes. He wasn’t too concerned but wanted her to see a doctor.

It turned out that Ms. Frank’s eyes were showing signs of jaundice. She had cirrhosis, severe scarring of the liver that usually takes years, or even decades, to develop.

Ms. Frank had been overweight and saw doctors for other conditions, her son David Frank said, but she never mentioned hearing any concerns about her liver. “How is it possible, with all the medical advances, that nobody knew this was a problem?” he said.
A version of this article appears in print on Oct. 8, 2024, Section D, Page 6 of the New York edition with the headline: This Disease Can Damage the Liver, Undetected. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

What to Know About Diabetes
Diabetes, a condition in which the body has trouble regulating blood sugar, is increasingly common among Americans.

    Over 37 million Americans have some form of diabetes. Scientists say that medical care won’t be enough to halt the spread of the disease: Sweeping societal changes are needed.

    Insulin resistance can be a precursor to diabetes and pre-diabetes. Here is what to know about the condition and how to know if you have it.

    For people with Type 1 diabetes, which often strikes in adolescence, staying healthy can be exhausting. A treatment that can delay the disease’s onset offers some hope.

    People who regularly eat red meat may have a higher risk of Type 2 diabetes later in life, according to a new study. Those who often consume processed meats have an even greater risk.

    Healthy practices can delay and prevent Type 2 diabetes. Something as simple as going for a 15-minute walk after a meal could help ward off the disease.

Related Content
More in Well

    Is Bone Broth Really Brimming With Health Benefits?

    Eric Helgas for The New York Times
    How Healthy Is Broccoli?

    Lars Klove for The New York Times
    One Thing Never to Say to a Grieving Friend

    Photographs by Getty Images
    Why ‘Unbalanced’ Muscles Can Cause You Pain
    What, Exactly, Is ‘Moderate Drinking’?

    Carl Godfrey
    Her Face Was Unrecognizable After an Explosion. A Placenta Restored It.
    Doctors used placenta-derived grafts on Marcella Townsend’s face after a propane explosion in 2021. Ms. Townsend said that was “the best thing they could have done, ever.”

    Kendrick Brinson for The New York Times

Editors’ Picks

    Claudia Conway Declares Her Independence
    Claudia Conway, the daughter of Kellyanne Conway, a top aide in the Trump White House, and George Conway, a longtime conservative lawyer, has more than two million combined followers on TikTok, X and Instagram.

    Ye Fan for The New York Times
    Woman Calls 911 When 100 Aggressive Raccoons Show Up in Her Yard
    About 30 of the raccoons that besieged a Washington State resident.

    Kitsap County Sheriff’s Department
    Aren’t I Entitled to Know Why My Husband Is on a Drug for H.I.V. Risk?

    Illustration by Tomi Um

Trending in The Times

    Giant Pandas From China Return to National Zoo in Washington, D.C.
    Would a Strong Job Market Stop Fed Rate Cuts? This Official Says No.
    ‘We Are Not a Monolith’: Black Artists Gather at the Philharmonic
    A Very English Sporting Scandal: Did a Steel Conker Taint a Title?
    2 Men Accused of Killing 72-Year-Old While Posing as Utility Workers
    The Flood-Protection Rule That Trump Rolled Back
    In British Columbia, a Political Party’s Collapse Echoes an Earlier Election
    N.J. Transit Train Hits Tree on Track, Killing 1 and Injuring 23
    Walgreens Says It Will Close 1,200 Stores
    Opinion: America Is on the Brink of a Great Political Realignment. It’s Already Visible in Arizona.

Site Index
Site Information Navigation

    © 2024 The New York Times Company

    NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions

