Economist, hello and welcome to The Intelligence from The Economist. I'm Jason Palmer and I'm Rosie Bla. Every weekday, we provide a fresh perspective on the events shaping your world.

Something like 95% of Africans have some kind of religious affiliation, and numbers have risen most strongly among the young. As they leave the continent with their faith in tow, African churches are springing up all over the place.

Gladiator 2 is out in the UK today and in the US next week. If all historical films say as much about our own age as the one they're depicting, what, asks our correspondent, do these muscly figures and superhuman strength slaves tell us about ourselves?

Though we're going to work very hard on Russia and Ukraine, last night US President-elect Donald Trump underlined one of his key foreign policy promises: to end the war in Ukraine. "It's got to stop. Russia and Ukraine's got to stop. Thousands and thousands of people over the last 3 days were killed. Thousands and thousands of people were killed. They happened to be soldiers, but whether they're soldiers..."

His relationship both with Russia and Ukraine is complicated. He's consistently refused to condemn Vladimir Putin's invasion. He appears to admire the Russian dictator's strongman style, and he once tried to blackmail Ukraine by withholding military assistance. So you might think that Trump's election victory would be a crushing blow to Ukraine. And yet, after the election, everyone in Ukraine is, of course, a signed-up member of the MAGA crowd. I mean, I've even seen "Make Ukraine Great Again" caps doing the rounds.

Alliv Caroll is The Economist's Ukraine correspondent. But in truth, at least part of the political and military leadership were hoping for a Trump victory. I'm really surprised to hear you say that. In what way could Trump be good for Ukraine?

Indeed, there is nothing in Trump's history that makes him seem particularly pro-Ukrainian. He's also quite fond of Vladimir Putin and his strongman antics, and he never really condemned the invasion. So it tells you really a little bit about how sticky the relationship between Zelensky and the Biden administration had become in recent times. The Americans were, on their side, annoyed at the Ukrainian sort of boots-on-the-table cowboy-type diplomacy. The Ukrainians, on the other hand, were getting annoyed at what they saw as the rhetoric of support being "in it for as long as it takes" for a Ukrainian victory, but they saw actions that were saying otherwise. So in the end, they were kind of ready to exchange that drip-drip life support for a gamble. You could, you know, argue it either way. Ukraine obviously hopes that Trump will be strong and decisive, put an end to the dithering. Though everyone here understands the range of possibilities is much greater, from very bad to very good.

But wasn't Trump actually promising to end the war within 24 hours? I mean, there's a general understanding on both sides, Russia and Ukraine, if not perhaps in the Trump camp, maybe even there, that you can't end this war in 24 hours. There are too many complicated moments. I was chatting to one high-placed source who's regularly in the Kremlin, and he said quick peace is not going to happen. Maybe a ceasefire, but only if that was combined with a discussion of what he called a new security system. So essentially, we're back to something like the Minsk agreements of February 2022.

Ukraine, on the other hand, doesn't believe Russia will stop. So again, I was just chatting this week to M. Paka, a presidential advisor, and he said, "Why would they? They haven't got what they wanted, and they're still pushing." But he thinks, I mean, this is the Ukrainians really hope that as soon as Trump starts to understand the real picture, as soon as he realizes the Putin of 2016 is no more, there's a different Putin, a more aggressive Putin, a more confident Putin, that Trump would eventually move to a position that is more favorable to Ukraine. So the idea of these two alpha males jostling for position—Putin wants to be number one, Trump obviously will not want to be number two—so in this sense, actually, a strong-armed proposal by Trump might offer Zelensky a way out. He could say, "Brothers and sisters, this is the brave new world. We don't really have a choice." But to be honest, I don't think Zelensky himself is in a psychological position to do that at the moment.

You say it might offer Ukraine a way out, but do we have any sense of what a plan could be? Yeah, so I mean, basically, before the election, there were two published plans, and this is what Ukraine had been working off. The first was associated with Vice President-elect JD Vance, and that was essentially freezing the conflict on the current lines, forcing Ukraine into a sense of neutrality without any sense of any security guarantees or checks on Putin. Obviously, it's a very unpopular position in Ukraine. That's position number one. A second position came from Mike Pompeo, the former Secretary of State, and that was more palatable to Ukrainians. It was the idea about creating a surge—more weapons, more money—that would boost Ukraine's standing. Perhaps even there would be the offer of NATO membership. There, of course, Ukrainians are much happier with this proposal. But the fact that Trump has publicly pushed Pompeo out of the picture doesn't look fantastic from Ukraine's standpoint. And the top security official I was speaking to this week said it was a really negative development that now they were thinking that actually they might be pushed more towards the Vance proposal, which looks essentially like territorial concessions, NATO out of the picture. What they were hoping was there would be some kind of security guarantee, and they're worried about that. They might try and take European Union membership, and Russia essentially forcing the militarization on them, and that's unacceptable for Ukraine.

And is there anything to stop him going for the Vance proposal, territorial concessions? A lot still has to be played out, but I think that wholesale sellout is unlikely. The news that Trump might be appointing Mike Waltz and Marco Rubio into top security and state positions, both of whom have been moderately hawkish towards Russia in the past at certain points, at the very least, that's been more welcomed in Ukraine. Ukraine presented what they called a victory plan just before the elections. It was presented first of all to Joe Biden, but also to Donald Trump. But they inserted clauses which suggested that the US might be given some control of certain natural resources, for example, and that Ukrainian troops might be sent to replace US troops in Europe. So Ukraine feels it has a chance. It feels if Zelensky can get in Trump's ear, if he can do this while Trump is figuring out where he stands on the issue, they have a chance. I think the problem is that Russia understands this too, and Russia has better resources, and it is better at working Washington and the Republican Party to its interest. History has shown that. So I think it will require a huge effort from Ukraine and from Ukraine's partners to overturn this disadvantage.

OE, isn't it an incredibly precarious moment for Ukraine? Russia continues to move forward. Ukraine is not on the front foot, and now we have no idea what's going to happen. Yeah, totally. I mean, I think the East, you know, Russia is at the moment surging, throwing everything it has at its assaults. There's been a huge blood cost for Russia. British military say 1,500 killed and wounded in action a day, and so there is a question how long that can last. The sad reality is that we've been asking this question for the whole of the last year, and throughout that year of Russia's offensive, they have been recruiting more men than they had been losing. They are growing their forces, unlike Ukraine, and Ukraine's likely to be in retreat for the rest of the year, probably very soon from K, which is a stronghold just outside of Donetsk, and then they'll probably turn to Pakos. We've been speaking about that quite a lot recently, an important coal mining town and a transport hub. And parallel to that, Russia is also apparently gearing up for an assault on Zaporizhzhia, which would be incredibly damaging to Ukraine's industrial base. It's an important industrial hub.

So this short-term problem has been about Ukrainian men and management. We have a breakdown in authority, a breakdown in morale, tensions between part of the army which is young, technocratic, and ready to experiment, and a general class which is less so. It was put to me by an intelligence source that the generals were trying to increase milk production by milking the cow for twice as long, how we put it. And people in the rear see that, and that's creating a sort of weakness in the rear. They don't want to go to the front lines to die. Huge deserter numbers. So there really couldn't be more on the line here. In a way, that challenge of Trump is just the icing on the cake for a country that's three years into war, whose very existence still lies very much in the balance.

Olle, thank you for talking to me. I'm sure we will talk again soon. It's always a pleasure.

I also wanted to let you know about an event on Monday which is open to subscribers. Demis Hassabis of Google DeepMind will be discussing how AI transforms science with James Manyika, also of Google, and moderated by Alok Jha, host of our science podcast Babbage. Search "subscriber event" on our site to sign up.

The Yoruba songs that you're hearing now are from a church service, part of a praise and worship segment that would typically open the service at a Pentecostal church like this one. And this specific church is a branch of Nigeria's Redeemed Christian Church of God. But this church isn't in Lagos, where I'm usually based. These worshippers are in London. As you well know, Oganbe, previously my co-host, is now our Africa correspondent. Although congregations in the West are shrinking, churches like these have been growing across Britain for years, and their growth is also proving a boost for the home churches in Nigeria as well.

So this seems to be sort of counter to the current we often hear about in terms of falling numbers in terms of churchgoers. Well, exactly. These pews have been increasingly packed with young Africans. This is a group of migrants that have been steadily arriving in Britain since the 1980s, probably even a bit earlier. And these days, 95% of Africans have a religious affiliation of some sort. Over half of them are Christian. So when they move, they take their religion with them, and they end up looking for familiar spaces when they arrive. Churches like these are an obvious start. You can hear it in the praise, you recognize your languages, and in some cases, people are drawn to these churches regardless of whether they were members of these churches in their home countries or not.

So there's, of course, deep spiritual reasons why a church might be happy that they're growing their congregations, right? It's missionary work, but there's also financial reasons why this is a good thing for them. Go on. So as in most churches, attendees are supposed to give a small monetary offering, but there's also quite a bit of pressure on these congregations to pay tithes, which is strictly equivalent to a tenth of your income. It's a pretty big deal. I mean, in fact, in 2018, the head pastor of this church, Enoch Adeboye, warned that for those who don't pay their tithes, their salvation is at stake. "Anyone who's not paying his tithe is not going to heaven, full stop." He warned that it is tantamount to robbing God. But there's actually no biblical backing for that. So last month, he took that back and said, "Sorry, I'm going to be apologizing for saying that if you don't pay tithe, you might not make it to heaven. I'm sorry, that's wrong." And it's reignited a debate about the monetary value of these congregations.

So has that impacted the popularity of Mr. Adeboye's church? Not at all, actually. I think people are quite impressed that he's humbled himself and apologized. And Redeemed Christian Church of God, the church he runs, is considered the fastest-growing church in Britain. It has almost 900 branches there across 197 countries. The church boasts 50,000 parishes. And so when all the churchgoers of these parishes pay their tithes, a percentage of that must then be remitted to their headquarters in Lagos. And that obviously is great for the church. But the growth of these churches isn't just interesting because it's lucrative. It's not just that these new churches are growing, but that the new members skew younger than you might expect. And the youth factor is keeping this church cool and current and kind of innovative.

Ooh, The Economist loves innovation. What's going on here? Well, the young members are going digital. They're taking their evangelism online. So increasingly, since the pandemic, you have live-streamed services as well as in-person ones. And that helps people set up small parishes in everything from old pubs to living rooms because they can just stream the services live. You very often hear pastors asking their worshippers mid-service to like the live streams on YouTube so that the algorithm boosts their messages on the feeds. I mean, you have QR codes for people to pay their tithes in multiple currencies from wherever they are. There's even, specifically in the case of this church, a digital missionary bot called Apostle Steven that's meant to help answer knotty spiritual questions that you might reserve for a minister. So naturally, I asked if I'd be blocked from heaven if I didn't pay my tithes. "While tithing is encouraged and beneficial for spiritual growth and supporting the church, it is not a condition for salvation." Yeah, so they seem to have got their ducks in a row on that one.

But there are benefits of this that again go beyond the church's bottom line. And you mentioned that a lot of these congregations are largely made up of migrants. Is it kind of part of the deal that they're trying to integrate locally wherever they are? Well, this is the thing. Not really. In fact, I found that these churches are specifically leaning into their African origins and the cultural connotations that come with these churches and using that to make their congregations feel more at home. So many of these churches also offer services in local African languages. And I specifically went to a Yoruba one. "We thank God for sustaining our lives up to this time." The idea is that these services can help keep lesser-spoken languages that migrants might miss alive. So Fe Adano, who pioneered Yoruba language services at this branch, told me that people find that their prayers are more powerful when they get to do it in their native languages. But if you left home many years ago, you might have forgotten some of that key vocab. "I... our Bible... I think I have to go to English. I'm sorry. At this time, please, I want us to open our Bible."

And this is the phenomenon we're not just seeing in Nigerian churches. British branches of the Ghana-headquartered Church of the Pentecost hold weekly services in Twi right after their English ones. But leaning into the Africanness and making it most of all appealing for migrants is kind of in contrast to that missionary mission, right? The idea of spreading it to the communities of wherever they are. Are they not missing a trick there? Well, if you have enough new members coming from the community that you already know, I guess the feeling is that you might not have to. This idea that these churches are here on a reverse mission, so like taking the gospel back to those who brought it, right, doesn't seem to be as important anymore as keeping the faith alive. And so as young Africans move across the world, not just to Britain, to everywhere from the Netherlands to Canada, you're likely to be hearing more of this wherever you are.

All right, tell me how I say thank you in Yoruba. "O se." I'll try. "O se." Thanks for having me, Jason.

What is the silliest moment in Gladiator 2? There are quite a lot. Katherine Nixey is a Britain correspondent for The Economist. So is it when a gladiator rides a rhino in the arena? Or is it when our hero Paul Mescal fights alongside his wife in battle? She's been provided with a breastplate that is molded to her actual breast. Or is it when he has to fight a computer-generated monkey, part Gibbon, part Gollum, in the arena? Or maybe it's the way that he keeps quoting from the first Gladiator film, saying things like "Strength and honor" and "I will have my vengeance," though he doesn't actually ask, "Are you not entertained?" Probably because you won't be, or at least not as much as last time.

Who is he? "Unleash hell." That was what the first Gladiator said at the beginning of the first Gladiator film. But for almost everyone who saw that film, this was heaven. From the moment that muscly Maximus Decimus Meridius appeared, father to a murdered son, husband to a murdered wife, possessor of the finest forearms that had been seen on screen for a while, the world was smitten.

The new film has changed a bit. It's got a completely new cast. You kind of had to do that. On screen as offscreen, both gladiators and emperors have very short life expectancies. But not much else has changed. The muscly Maximus has become the even more muscly Lucius. The mad Emperor Commodus has become two mad emperors, Gaius and Caracalla.

All period dramas are set in not one era but two: the one they're ostensibly about and the one that they're actually filmed in. Bridgerton, with its sub-Downton Abbey dialogue and its colorblind casting, was every bit as much about 2020 as 1813. Roman epics are all similarly dated. So Quo Vadis, which was a 1951 American film, was about a very 1950s style of American Christianity. "Millions of persons have already seen and applauded MGM's mighty Technicolor spectacle. I'm now about to begin this strange history of my life, of my family. I'm going to marry." The British television series I, Claudius offered racy 1970s debauchery that was also very British. And the original Gladiator expressed the kind of idealism about democracy and the hope for it that happened at the turn of the millennium. So Marcus Aurelius wanted Maximus to help return power to the people. This was basically total nonsense, but it was very fitting for the year 2000. This was history backing up Francis Fukuyama's The End of History.

It's very hard to say what Gladiator 2 says about today. This film feels much more muddled. It pays some lip service to democracy, but belief in democracy on screen, as off, now seems to feel far more feeble than before. The true villains in this film seem to be the idle rich. Its heroes are Rome's immigrant workers. So the enslaved Lucius toils with superhuman strength throughout, including a very strange scene where he's on a Roman rowing machine. His fellow gladiators also come across well, as does their Indian doctor. Even the wicked gladiator master, Maccius, is much more appealing than the dimwit aristocrats who he serves and outw