archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
no other snapshots from this url
	
21 Nov 2024 11:05:49 UTC
All snapshots	from host www.nytimes.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuse
Skip to content
Skip to site index
Log in
The Hunt for …

    An East Side Studio
    A House in Los Angeles
    A Home in Hudson Valley
    A Flat in London

The Hunt
She Took Her $300,000 Budget to the Washington, D.C., Area. Could She Afford Something in the City?
By Michele LernerNov. 21, 2024

Excited to start a new government job, a young first-time buyer considered starter apartments inside and outside the Beltway. Here’s what she found.
Gianna Licari moved to the Washington, D.C., area from Chicago after taking a new job with the federal government.
Gianna Licari moved to the Washington, D.C., area from Chicago after taking a new job with the federal government. Maansi Srivastava for The New York Times
Gianna Licari has an epic Barbie collection and loves everything pink, but she’s tough when it comes to getting what she wants. The 23-year-old Chicago native graduated a year early from the University of California, Los Angeles, then set her sights on moving to the nation’s capital.
“My dad was a D.E.A. agent back in the 1980s, and I always wanted to follow in his footsteps working in government,” Ms. Licari said.
At first, she worked remotely from her parents’ Chicago home to save money. “I couldn’t kick down doors,” she said, “but my first job was in the F.D.A.’s Office of Ethics and Integrity.”
In July 2023, she was excited to move east for a new job with the government, even though she didn’t know anyone in the Washington, D.C., area. Her first priority: figuring out how she could buy a place rather than overpay for a local rental. She set her budget at $300,000, but was primarily focused on keeping monthly payments under $2,500.
[Did you recently buy a home? We want to hear from you. Email: thehunt@nytimes.com]
“Inventory for anything in that price range was really low in the fall of 2023, and it’s still low,” said Chris Kuchnicki, an agent with the Keri Shull Team at eXp Realty in Arlington, Va. “Anything you can find usually sells fast.”
Since Ms. Licari doesn’t own a car, transportation options and walkability were important. She looked for listings within a 10-minute walk of Metro stations throughout the region.
“To find something I could afford, I looked farther and farther away from the city in Maryland and Virginia,” she said. “I didn’t love the idea of an hourlong commute, but I also was determined to buy rather than waste money on rent.”
She planned to use her savings and her salary to finance a purchase, and didn’t want to ask her parents for help with the down payment.
“Gianna seemed like a prime candidate for first-time home buyer assistance programs, so I had her send her paperwork to a lender qualified with those programs,” Mr. Kuchnicki said. “A lot of people aren’t aware that they can qualify for home buyer assistance. The income limits are higher than they realize.”
In the end, the search came down to three condos.
No. 1
Two-Bedroom in Rockville, Md.
Maansi Srivastava for The New York Times
This 1,053-square-foot condo had two bedrooms and two bathrooms, so Ms. Licari could have a separate space for a home office. The open-plan unit came with wall-to-wall carpeting, a washer-dryer and a balcony with interior views. The 1971 building was a five-minute walk from Rockville Town Center, which offered plenty of shops and restaurants, as well as from the Red Line Metro (the ride into Washington took just under an hour). The apartment needed some work, and the $1,230 monthly HOA fee was high. The asking price was $225,000, with annual taxes of about $2,120.
Long & Foster Real Estate
No. 2
One-Bedroom in Washington, D.C.
Maansi Srivastava for The New York Times
At 560 square feet, this condo in Washington’s Navy Yard neighborhood was the smallest place Ms. Licari considered. The compact bedroom had a barn door and a transom window into the living area, and the large bathroom had a stacked washer-dryer. The new 171-unit building, which offered amenities including a rooftop pool, was adjacent to the Metro station and a block from the Washington Nationals’ baseball stadium, with lots of bars and restaurants around. Ms. Licari liked the area but was a little worried about noise at night. The asking price was $240,200, with a monthly HOA fee of $242 and annual taxes of $1,617.
KW Metro Center
No. 3
One-Bedroom in Vienna, Va.
Maansi Srivastava for The New York Times
This updated one-bedroom, one-bath unit with about 740 square feet was in a condo complex in Vienna, Va., about an hour east of Washington. The apartment came with an office nook for Ms. Licari’s desk, new heating and air-conditioning systems, new flooring and a covered balcony overlooking a courtyard. The complex offered a pool, a gym and a media room, and was right across the street from a Metro station (but it was the last stop on the line). The asking price was $294,000, with a monthly HOA fee of $389 and annual taxes of $3,081.
GSHwang Realty
Find out what happened next by answering these two questions:
Which Would You Choose?
Two-Bedroom in Rockville, Md.
One-Bedroom in Washington, D.C.
One-Bedroom in Vienna, Va.
Which Did She Buy?
Two-Bedroom in Rockville, Md.
One-Bedroom in Washington, D.C.
One-Bedroom in Vienna, Va.

In Search of the Perfect Home
Whether you are looking to rent or buy, navigating the housing market is not an easy task. Explore how some people found what they were looking for.

    A New Chapter in the Twin Cities: A recent retiree toured condos of all stripes in Minneapolis and St. Paul, looking for something he could get excited about. Here’s what he found.
    A House in Chicago: When a couple learned they were expecting, finding a bigger home became a priority. Could they afford an extra bedroom, a decent kitchen and some outdoor space?
    A Three-Bedroom House in California: A young schoolteacher in the Central Valley plotted his way toward homeownership one move at a time.
    Following Her Heart in San Francisco: A first-time buyer put her savings to work in the expensive Bay Area housing market, using the local tenancy-in-common model to find something she could afford. Here’s where she landed.
    An R.V. to a Condo Near Washington: After spending two years on the road and having a baby, a young couple decided to put down roots just south of the nation’s capital. Here’s what they found.

Related Content
The Hunt
Tag along on a search for a new home.

    Searching for a ‘Forever Home’ in Boston, a Family Played the Long Game
    Mallory and David Gonzalez with their son, Rainer, in Boston, where they recently purchased a “forever home” after a yearslong search.
    Two Empty Nesters Flew to the City With $600,000 for an East Side Studio
    From left, Jay Krishnamoorthy and Vidya Jayaraman with their daughter, Rithika Jayaraman, in Manhattan.

More in Real Estate

    ‘Excuse Me! How Much Do You Pay for Rent in New York?’
    Caleb Simpson has developed a huge online following by asking people he meets on the street for impromptu house tours.
    Coming Home to Bed-Stuy
    The Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn continues to lure the Black creative and professional classes who rent, purchase and renovate brownstones, despite the rising costs of homeownership and changing neighborhood demographics.
    Lisa Corson for The New York Times
    ‘An Absolute Mess’: Brokers Assess the Shift in Fees
    Keyan Sanai, a rental broker at Douglas Elliman, is among those who will be affected by the rule change. The move is an apparent win for renters, but some observers caution it is not so simple.
    Graham Dickie/The New York Times
    $2.4 Million Homes in California
    Scott Everts for Sotheby’s International Realty

Editors’ Picks

    How Healthy Are Sweet Potatoes?
    Nico Schinco for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Barrett Washburne.
    Airlines Hate ‘Skiplagging.’ Meet the Man Who Helps Travelers Pull It Off.
    Skiplagging offers significant value to cost-conscious travelers, Aktarer Zaman says, and he’s invigorated to empower them with his website.
    Aktarer Zaman

Trending in The Times

    Anthony Weiner’s Latest Redemption Tour Starts With a Haircut
    Desi Lydic Digs Into the Sordid Claims Against Matt Gaetz
    The Simple Trick That Makes Vegetables Their Best Selves
    The Appeal of the Smaller Breast
    What Do I Get the Person Who Needs Nothing?
    Archegos Founder Bill Hwang Is Sentenced to 18 Years
    Intense West Coast Wind and Snow Knock Out Power and Close Roads
    Shouting Racial Slurs, Neo-Nazi Marchers Shock Ohio’s Capital
    Son of Norway’s Crown Princess Is Arrested on Suspicion of Rape
    Two Bee Gees Drummers Die Within Four Days

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
News
Arts
Lifestyle
Opinion
More
Site Information Navigation

    © 2024 The New York Times Company

    NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions

    Manage Privacy Preferences

0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
