https://www.nytimes.com/live/2024/11/05/opinion/ezra-klein-ross-douthat-election
Ezra Klein and Ross Douthat on the Night’s Big Questions
Published Nov. 5, 2024 Updated Nov. 6, 2024, 12:18 a.m. ET

Opinion
Ezra Klein and Ross Douthat on the Night’s Big Questions
Published Nov. 5, 2024 Updated Nov. 6, 2024, 8:49 a.m. ET
ImageTwo voters sit at a foldable table behind screens that read “VOTE” with a large American flag.
Credit...Harlan Bozeman for The New York Times

Ross Douthat
Ezra Klein
Nov. 5, 2024, 11:54 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross Douthat and Ezra Klein
Could a Trump Victory Offer an ‘Unlikely Opening to American Renewal’?
Image
A man wearing a red hat with “Trump” on the back.
Credit...Damon Winter/The New York Times

Aaron: Ross, it’s looking more and more like the candidate you kinda, sorta, maybe wanted to win is going to win. This is kind of a funny question to ask in a round table like this one, but how does it make you feel? Are you happy? Sad? Fearful? Thrilled?

Ross: Wanted? What I wanted, from back when I first started writing about the Republican Party and the idea of some sort of pan-ethnic working-class conservatism — almost 20 years ago now, my God — was a conservative populism that I could be proud to support, led by morally idealistic politicians I admired who took policy seriously and cared deeply about the common good.

What I got, what we all got, was a conservative populism midwifed by Donald Trump, a man I never wanted to be president, a man I still don’t think should be president, a man who trafficked in bluster and bigotry and ran a completely chaotic White House and tried to overturn an election and so on down the list that’s all too familiar to readers of this newspaper.

And yet here we are — barring a dramatic late-night reversal, this is the Trump era, well and truly; there is no conservative populism except the kind Trump forged into what looks right now like a narrow but real majority, and all the right-leaning ideas and figures that I’m inclined to place any hope in at all are still inextricably bound to him, a bad man but also undeniably a man of destiny, for four more long years.

And my emotion is, fundamentally, acceptance. I am a providentialist, more so as I get older and weirder; I believe in a God whose intentions are visible (however dimly) in human history, and I have to accept that this strange situation is what we’re being given now. Maybe ultimately just as a long chastisement for liberals and conservatives alike. Or maybe as an unlikely opening to American renewal.

Either way, along with acceptance there is simple journalistic curiosity: I am quite interested to see what happens next.

Aaron: Well, I will say only that I am very far from acceptance. I’m not even ready for resignation. I’m just unhappy and a little bit — more than a little bit — angry. But I will also say that I’m deeply grateful to you and to Ezra for spending six hours with me talking all this over. There will be more to say, although listening to you and Ezra, I found myself overwhelmed by your fluency, almost silenced. This, plus the fact that we are gazing at the specter of a second Trump term, a potentially vicious sequel, put me in mind of the famous Beckett quote from his dialogues with Georges Duthuit, the conceit of which is that Beckett is always defeated by his friend’s superior eloquence. Since we started with Hobbes and Locke, we’ll give Beckett the last word: “The expression that there is nothing to express, nothing with which to express, nothing from which to express, no power to express, no desire to express, together with the obligation to express.”


Ross Douthat
Ezra Klein
Nov. 5, 2024, 11:22 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross Douthat and Ezra Klein
Why Are Democrats Losing Support?

Aaron: If Harris loses, what happened? Is it MAGA plus inflation? A radical reordering of American society of the type you were hinting at earlier? What does the Democratic Party look like if, say, they lose the White House, lose the Senate and fail to win the House back?

Ezra: As I write this, it’s not looking good for Harris. I always want to be careful prejudging an election when we have very thin data on it. As of now, we don’t know who will win, or by how much, or with what kind of coalition. Even when the vote is counted, it’ll take months to have the validated voter file data that lets us talk confidently about shifts in subgroups; exit polls just aren’t reliable enough for that.

But no matter how the election plays out, what seems crystal clear is that Democrats lost a lot of support in blue states like New York and Virginia. If they lose the election, that won’t be why they lost the election, but in some ways I think it’ll be more analytically telling: This is where voters who were inclined to support them defected. And they didn’t just defect from Harris.

One simple explanation is this just fits the international trend: We’ve seen incumbent parties on both the left and the right annihilated worldwide, so perhaps this simply reflects the difficulty of running the government amid the post-pandemic inflation. If the election is decided by a shift of a few points against the incumbent Democrats, that might be more than enough explanation.

But I’ve long been inclined to be a little skeptical of that explanation. There’s not enough of an anti-incumbent mood downballot to make me certain this is an inevitable and automatic backlash against incumbents. And if it is a shift of just a few points, that also implies there’s probably candidates and strategies the Democratic Party could have pursued to prevent it. The truth is Biden’s approval numbers have been horrible for years now and the candidate on the ballot was Biden’s vice president, who had to take up the mantle of leadership with little time to differentiate herself. And it wasn’t just time standing in her way: The Democratic Party is proud of Biden’s record and never wanted to face up to its unpopularity.

But again, this is provisional, and you should be skeptical of anyone offering grand theories based on incomplete data.
Nov. 5, 2024, 10:46 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Kamala Harris Should Have Gone on Joe Rogan’s Show
Image
Credit...Damon Winter/The New York Times

Aaron: Following up on that, but from a different angle, Annie Stone of Somerville, Mass., asks, “Do you think Kamala should have done more to reach out to young male voters, and if so, what would you have liked to see?”

Ross: To begin with, she should have — no joke! — gone on Joe Rogan’s show, and generally imitated Trump’s strategy of showing up on more nonpolitical shows and podcasts that skew young and male. Maybe that would have led to disasters, but as it stood she wasn’t taking any real shots at all. I also think she should have picked a different running mate: Yes, Tim Walz has good approval ratings; yes, he’s a likable-enough guy, but he played as a liberal’s idea of an enlightened red-state dad, not the kind of avatar of masculinity that young men actually tend to find appealing.

Finally, substantively, men are somewhat more conservative than women, and if you want to win more male votes — young or old — it helps to find some issues where you can distinguish yourself as more moderate-to-conservative than the typical Democrat. I’d say that Harris worked hard to distance herself from her past left-wing positions, but never quite figured out a range of specific moderate ideas and arguments to take their place — and I suspect that failure cost her more with men than women.

Ezra: She should’ve gone on Rogan, and much else besides. I’ve been arguing for years that Democrats need to be going on Rogan — I was arguing this back when Bernie Sanders got backlash for going on Rogan’s show. In this cycle, I argued that Harris — or at least Walz — should’ve gone on Rogan. Hell, send Barack Obama. You go where the voters you need to reach are. Rogan’s not even a tough interviewer!

But Rogan is symbolic of something bigger. There is an alienation that’s grown between young men and much of the Democratic Party. For years, there’s been no real way of talking about masculinity in liberal circles that didn’t attach the word “toxic” before it. There’s been a reveling in growing female strength and a deep critique of male culture. You can have any view you want on the merits of that, but it’s had consequences. Whatever you think of Walz, he’s a vice-presidential pick, and that’s not the part of the ticket people vote for.

There’s certainly some policy shifts that might matter here. But my sense is this is more cultural, and the distaste for Rogan reflects a distaste of the dominant culture among young men more broadly.



Nov. 5, 2024, 10:35 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
If Harris Loses, What Will Democrats Do?

Aaron: Reader questions are pouring in, so let’s stay with them. Here’s Jordan Hendershot of Indiana: “I still think Trump has the upper hand in this election. Will there be a new reckoning among Democrats if Trump wins again? How will Democrats shift their positions or rhetoric in response?”

Ezra: Much more so than the Republican Party, the Democratic Party tends to respond to defeat by trying to address the weaknesses that led it to lose. In 2016, the weakness was Midwestern white voters who, the story went, were alienated by the Democratic Party’s hard turn toward an elitist multiculturalism. The response was, well, Joe Biden: a temperamentally moderate pol from Pennsylvania who came up in a Democratic Party that knew how to win those voters.

If the Democrats lose in 2024, what they do next will reflect the reasons they think they lost. That will most likely be the hemorrhaging of non-college voters that, at this point, has begun eating into their traditional strength with Black and Hispanic men. So one likely possibility is a hard push toward whoever in the party knows how to win back the kinds of voters or states Democrats are losing. Would that be Josh Shapiro? Mark Kelly? Gretchen Whitmer? Raphael Warnock?

The other option — which you might call the Obama option — is if some kind of new political talent emerges that shakes up the way Democrats think they can win. A Trump victory in 2024 would be most like George W. Bush’s re-election in 2004 in the level of Democratic trauma and soul-searching it would induce. After that, Democrats obsessed over losing “heartland” voters and their alienation from everyday Americans and their weakness on national security. What no one was saying was that Democrats needed a young Black man with a strange-sounding name whose politics were forged in Chicago. But Barack Obama’s political talent was so undeniable — and by that point, the Republican Party’s brand was so trashed by the disaster of the Iraq War — that the party went with inspiration over cold calculation. That could happen, too.

Ross: The nature of Trump’s victory in 2016 made it easy for Democrats to dismiss it as a fluke (if not a Russian plot), Trump’s political weakness thereafter seemed to create a big opening for progressive ambitions, and the result was a Democratic Party that, yes, nominated an aging moderate for president but otherwise moved sharply to the left. I do not expect that to happen this time, if Harris loses: I think there may be some socialist stirrings, some arguments from the Bernie Sanders left that identity politics doomed the party but social democracy can save it, but the dominant reaction will be to rally around governors like Josh Shapiro and Gretchen Whitmer and Jared Polis, and try to reconstitute the party as a more moderate formation.

With the proviso, of course, that all such strategizing would be shaped by the as-yet-unknown nature of a potential second Trump term, the crises it might provoke and the opportunities it would undoubtedly present.
Nov. 5, 2024, 10:22 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Trump and the Knotty Question of Character

Aaron: Let’s go back to our readers for a while. They have a lot of … thoughts. And good ones. Julien Stockwell, of Portland, Ore., posed a really knotty question: “Some Trump voters seem to dismiss the character of the candidate, but embrace his projected strength. How is strength making it through as an important quality while morality isn’t? Plenty of economic and security issues play into morality — I find the two difficult to separate.”

Ross: I think you can go back to earlier figures in our politics — Bill Clinton comes to mind — to find examples of politicians whom many voters regarded as indecent but still preferred over their rivals for reasons of policy, effectiveness or both. Trump is a more extreme case, more naked in his amorality, and clearly he draws some voters in with the idea that toughness and decency are somehow opposed, that you need to be ruthless in order to get things done, defeat your enemies, safeguard America, etc. But I think for many, many voters in a democratic society, there’s just a utilitarian instinct at work when they go to the polls: They don’t love the bad guy for being a bad guy, but they forgive a lot of character flaws if a leader seems to deliver economic growth, or military victory, or some other fundamental-seeming good. And to the extent Trump is winning new voters this time around, that’s the core reason. People recall the economy or the foreign-policy landscape of 2018 or 2019 fondly, and make their peace with a moral deficit in the hopes of getting those outcomes back.

Ezra: For many voters, Trump’s amorality — or even his immorality — is intrinsic to his appeal. Trump frames himself as the steely dealmaker, the cold C.E.O., the relentless fighter. There’s an oft-mentioned gangster-like dimension to his persona, or perhaps his personality.

Sure, there are people who vote for him in spite of the way he acts, but the intensity of his support reflects many, many people who vote for him because of it. For some, they feel they need someone like that on their side to defend them from a culture or institutions that have turned on them — this describes much of the fervency of evangelical Christian support for Trump. For others, Trump simply embodies a kind of ruthlessness they respect. In that way, I don’t think so many of these voters are connecting to Trump’s strength but ignoring his character; I think his strength, for them, is intimately connected to his character and his clear willingness to do anything, run over anyone, break any rule or roadblock that stands in his way.

I think one way you can see this is to watch the behavior of the Republican politicians following in Trump’s footsteps, most notably JD Vance. They don’t just adopt Trump’s braggadocio or shows of strength; they also mimic his cruelty, his insults, his contempt for his opponents, his dismissal of censure or norms of civility. They understand that these traits are at the core of what makes Trump hated by his enemies, yes, but beloved by his base.



Nov. 5, 2024, 9:26 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Joe Biden Put Democrats in a Tough Spot

Aaron: It was only four months ago — not even, quite — that Joe Biden gave up his campaign. The Democrats quickly consolidated around Harris. Regardless of whether she wins or loses, was that a mistake? Was the process a mistake? How can we break the taboo against running primaries against incumbents? If Harris loses, how much will you blame Biden’s decision to hang on for as long as he did?

Ezra: It was a mistake for Joe Biden to run for re-election. Democrats would’ve been far better off with a real primary in which to test the strength of different candidates, Harris included. By the time Biden actually dropped out, just weeks before the Democratic convention, there wasn’t really time for even a mini-primary, and the party didn’t have the stomach for, or interest in, a contested convention.

The cost of leaving that switch to the very last minute — for Harris included — was the absence of time to develop the themes and substance of a campaign. Harris ran smartly in the time she had. She has far overperformed the expectations party elites had of her, say, a year ago. But with more time to prepare and test and think and polish, she — or another candidate — might have settled on an argument about the country and its condition that resonated more deeply.

If Harris wins, this will all be moot. If she loses, it’s going to be wrenching for Democrats, and the fact that the party spent most of the election cycle united behind an unpopular octogenarian who supermajorities of Americans thought too old for the job will look like a catastrophic mistake.

Ross: I think you have to appreciate Ezra’s point, earlier in this dialogue, that it was such a wrench for the Democrats to force Joe Biden off the ticket that there was no institutional energy left to then go to some sort of open convention. But that still leaves plenty of blame to go around if they ultimately lose — most of it for Biden, obviously, for not dropping out earlier, but some of it for all the party actors who enabled him and dismissed the issue as right-wing misinformation until reality finally broke through their firewall. And of course you can also go further back and say that the original choice of Harris as a running mate was a grave mistake, forced upon Biden by the “racial reckoning” of 2020 when in hindsight he would have been far better off with a professional Midwestern moderate like, say, Amy Klobuchar as his presumptive successor instead.
Nov. 5, 2024, 9:07 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Is Abortion Turning the Gender Gap Into a Chasm?

Aaron: Musk and many other MAGA supporters have obviously made a big deal out of being manly men. Trump was just calling into radio shows in Pennsylvania exhorting men to get out and vote while there was still time. His adviser Stephen Miller, one of the champions of mass deportation, also got into it, tweeted around 6 p.m.: “If you know any men who haven’t voted, get them to the polls.” All of which brings me to the question we got from a reader in Alameda, Calif., Barbara Weiss, who asks: “To what extent does the Republican diminishment of women’s autonomy hurt them? Is their disrespectful attitude real or some kind of cosplay?”

Ross: I think you have to distinguish somewhat between Donald Trump’s specific style of disrespect and the phenomenon of Republicans realizing that young men are breaking their way even as young women move left, and trying to make the most of that trend. Exhorting men to go vote in that context is basically just what you’d expect in a landscape where the sexes are increasingly polarized — an inevitable imitation of the way that Democrats have tried to pull more and more women into their coalition with issues like abortion, a right-wing answer to “The Future Is Female” and similar slogans. I don’t think we should be happy about the overall trend, since in a healthy society the sexes are supposed to unite, not polarize against each other, and I certainly think it can feed into misogyny. But no one should be surprised that a liberalism organized around a specific vision of women’s issues would end up facing off against a conservatism making a mirror-image appeal to male voters.

Ezra: One thing you cannot accuse the Trump campaign of is subtlety. In a sense, all campaigns are about turning out their supporters to vote. Why didn’t Miller say, “If you know any Trump voters who haven’t voted, get them to the polls”? Trump is winning, and will win, men — but it’s not a 90-10 voting bloc for him. So this also reflects a joy in stoking division and trolling online, which are also fundamental to the Trump ethos.

But I’d separate that out a bit from the diminishment of women’s autonomy, which is more than just Stephen Miller tweets. I do think that hurts them. How much better off would the Republican Party be today if Dobbs had never been decided? Quite a bit.

Ross: Somewhat better off, undoubtedly, though from a pro-life as opposed to partisan-Republican perspective it’s clearly worth paying a political price for that long-sought victory. Overall, I’d say the polarization of the sexes is both driven by the abortion debate and also probably itself a driver of increasing pro-choice sentiment, since the more the pro-life cause is associated with a G.O.P. that presents as the “men’s party,” the less it’s likely to be trusted by conflicted female voters. But with that said, it already appears that the sweeping pro-choice constitutional amendment in Florida will fall short of passage tonight, and if Donald Trump wins nationally a lot of stories about how Dobbs has doomed Republicans will have to be rewritten.



Ross Douthat
Aaron Retica
Nov. 5, 2024, 8:45 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross Douthat and Aaron Retica
Trump Is Cruising in Florida. Is It a Bad Sign for Harris?
Image
Credit...Rose Marie Cromwell for The New York Times

Aaron: Looks like Trump is cruising in Florida, once a swing state, much like Ohio, which will undoubtedly go for Trump, too. As Katie Wasserman of Flagstaff, Ariz., asks, “Is it an outlier or a bad sign for Kamala?”

Ross: It’s a bad sign for Harris. While we’ve been talking here the early returns have clearly buoyed Trump’s odds: He isn’t just winning in Florida, he’s romping, and he’s winning in places like Duval County that seem like they might foreshadow a victory in neighboring Georgia. The hope for Democrats is that — as was the case in 2020 and 2022 — the continuing rightward shift in Florida is more of a Floridian story than a national one, and that there’s a decoupling between trends in, say, Miami and trends in the Midwest. (In part, perhaps, because a lot of right-leaning Americans have left the Midwest for Ron DeSantis’s state!) But the scale at which Trump is winning Florida would require that decoupling to be more extreme than in the last two cycles.
Nov. 5, 2024, 8:20 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Elon Musk Is in a Category All His Own

Aaron: Elon Musk has been deeply involved in this campaign on Trump’s side. He just tweeted a few minutes ago “Dark MAGA assemble.” Do I know exactly what that means? No. But I can’t say I like the sound of it. There are billionaires on both sides, the world’s weirdest version of both-siderism. Does the future of America depend on the development of more people like Elon Musk, industrial giant, or fewer? Peter Thiel helped bring your friend JD Vance first into Silicon Valley and then into politics, Ross. The right is obsessed with George Soros’s role on the left. Help us sort all this out. Is this a disaster for democracy, a great thing for society, what, exactly? It makes me queasy every which way, if I’m being honest. What do you two think?

Ross: My provocation would be that Musk is a bit like the version of Mozart in the movie “Amadeus” — a figure who can seem so puerile and immature (“Dark MAGA assemble” is the battle cry of an irredeemable dork, surely) as to obscure the reality of his genius, and especially to obscure his genius among liberals who now find themselves watching him try to elect Donald Trump. But the reality is that the category of “billionaires” is one thing, and Musk is in a category all his own: What he’s done with SpaceX and Tesla, create world-altering companies through a mix of technical mastery and sheer force of will, and what he may do with SpaceX especially going forward (I would not bet against the promised manned Mars mission), are likely to make him one of the defining figures of the century. That doesn’t mean you have to like him or agree with him politically or feel entirely chill about his potential role in a Trump White House. But you also don’t want to contort yourself into a Salierian position where you can’t acknowledge the reasons you might want him advising the next president, especially as we head into a pretty weird future with A.I. and related technologies — and especially since Musk himself, unlike a lot of people currently trying to build the Machine God, seems to actually like the human race.

Ezra: I think you have to cut this into a few questions. How should we feel that the world’s richest man bought what was — and probably still is — the most politically influential social media platform and turned it into a tool of his own personal political influence? I think you should feel pretty badly about that!

I’m not one of those liberals who denies Musk’s accomplishments. They’re remarkable. But I don’t think human history offers much credence to the view that being a great industrialist is highly correlated with having decent, humane or wise politics. Would America have been better off with Henry Ford whispering in the president’s ear, or trying to become shadow-president himself? Or Howard Hughes?

We’ve seen many different Elon Musks over time. The Musk who built Tesla was a big fan of Barack Obama. His rightward turn is more recent and is rife with conspiracy theories and deranged memes and an abandonment of the optimistic futurism he once professed. Musk ended the campaign by going on Joe Rogan’s podcast and saying if Trump didn’t win the election, there probably wouldn’t be any more elections in America. Musk often seems to me to like the human race a lot more in the abstract than he does in the specific.

Ross: I agree that like many aspects of a second Trump administration, Musk’s influence is what you would call “high variance.” There’s a world where that influence cashes out in space exploration and pro-natalism and a farseeing A.I. policy — and also a world where it cashes out in conspiracism and Dark MAGA memes. I would just stress that relative to other figures who might influence the Trump White House, the potential upside of some of Musk’s obsessions is unusually high.



Nov. 5, 2024, 8:02 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Why Are Americans So Pessimistic?

Aaron: I am fascinated by how many Americans think we are on the wrong track — nearly two-thirds. I’m not saying I don’t agree, but why do you think that is, exactly, when material conditions in the United States would not suggest that psychological conditions should be anything like that? What’s actually being caught there? Why is about two-thirds of America so down on the future?

Ross: Start with the fact that we went straight from a once-in-a-century pandemic into a major bout of inflation (which voters seem to really, really hate): That’s a lot of unpleasantness packed into a few short years, and it suffices to explain some of the sour mood even if unemployment rates are low and inflation has come down. (I would expect that another year of current economic trends would reduce the wrong-track numbers.)

But then beneath the economic statistics, there’s clearly a deeper psychological or spiritual malaise (sorry to sound like Jimmy Carter!). It has something to do with the unhappy transition to very-online, screen-dominated life; something to do with the recent wave of secularization; something to do with anxiety about America’s wobbling position in the world; something to do with climate change concerns; something to do with my personal obsession, low birthrates and the retreat from marriage and family. That will do for a short list of potential causes. We can argue about which ones matter most, but there’s a discontent that doesn’t seem reducible to trends in G.D.P.

Ezra: I am sympathetic to much of what Ross said. But also: Americans have mostly been saying we’re on the wrong track for decades. The extent of the pessimism varies, but the pessimism is largely constant. At the same time, people are pretty positive about their own lives and prospects in polls. It’s like how people hate Congress as an institution but like their member of Congress.

So what’s behind the divergence? Is it that media coverage emphasizes whatever is going most wrong, and whatever social conflicts are most heated, at that moment? Is it accelerated by social media preference for engagement-by-outrage? Does it reflect political polarization?

I was thinking, writing this, how would I answer this question if a pollster asked it of me? I’m sitting here wondering whether America is about to re-elect one of the most indecent people in the country to lead us for another four years. That wasn’t something I worried about in 2014. So if you asked me if we’re on the right track or the wrong track, I’d probably say the wrong track, even though I could give you chapter and verse on how comparatively strong our economy has been, how world-beating our companies are, the remarkable slew of technological advances we’ve seen in recent years. But there’s no one answer to the question: America is on the right track in some ways, the wrong track in others, and how people answer the question hinges on what they’ve been cued to pay the most attention to.
Nov. 5, 2024, 7:27 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
How Culture Wars Have Shaped Politics

Aaron: I should say that we will start talking about the results as they come in and we will undoubtedly leave Hobbes and Locke behind. But here’s something we can discuss without quite knowing what happened yet, results-wise. Where do the blue-state backlash against woke and the red-state backlash against abortion restrictions leave us?  There are referendums in 10 states on abortion (two in Nebraska, confusingly, where they only have one house for their Legislature) that will be decided tonight.

Ezra: I’m going to be annoying and say I don’t think we can discuss this without knowing the election results! In both cases, though, I think individual instances of successful backlash can obscure broader wins: Abortion really is much restricted across the country compared with where it was pre-Dobbs; the backlash to wokeness obscures how much of the fundamental ideas from that era are now fully metabolized into American society.

Ross: I’ll offer an appropriately speculative answer: The abortion referendums may help the pro-choice side win on the actual issue in question without necessarily helping the Democratic Party win elections, because they give cross-pressured voters a chance to overturn pro-life laws without ever casting an actual Democratic vote. With wokeness, it’s the reverse: It may help Republican candidates win some elections in blue states without necessarily touching the underlying issues, since the woke style of progressivism is concentrated in nongovernmental and para-governmental institutions — academia, big foundations, parts of the media — that aren’t going to shift their ideological approach just because the G.O.P. wins some extra House seats in New York or Virginia or California. (Though if the Republicans win full control of Washington, D.C., I would expect some battles over taxes and subsidies specifically related to elite universities.)



Nov. 5, 2024, 6:58 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
The Parties Are Shifting, but Elections Are Still Insanely Close

Aaron: Speaking of the party coalitions, there are a zillion different ways to slice up the electorate, but one thing we can all agree on, I think, is that it is shifting intensely, even as it seems to be somehow staying in mutually polarized camps. I’m going to let you take this as an open-ended question. What interests you most here? The gender gap that is rapidly turning into a gender chasm? The racial realignment, if in fact it comes to pass? Religious and nonreligious? Feel free to substitute your own.

Ross: I guess I’ll cheat and pick two: The polls have promised us diminishing racial depolarization and deepening gender polarization, and I’m curious how far both of those trends actually go. Racial depolarization is a nice trend for conservatives to cite to tweak antiracist liberals — while you were assigning Ibram X. Kendi, Donald Trump was winning over actual minority voters! But I wouldn’t be entirely surprised if the polling ended up slightly exaggerating the shift of African Americans and Hispanics to the right, especially if undecided minority voters end up coming home to the Democrats. Likewise, the Harris campaign has clearly made a bet that the usual Democratic advantage with single women can be supplemented, post-Dobbs, by winning over a lot more married right-leaning women. If they’re right, we’ll be in unprecedented and potentially toxic territory in terms of having a politics polarized between the sexes — but I also wouldn’t be surprised if the married women’s vote ended up looking more like 2020, which is to say more Republican-friendly than the Harris campaign hopes.

Ezra: I think the core story of American politics in this era is the educational realignment: Harris looks likely to win college voters — a Republican-leaning bloc in recent memory — by a wider margin than any other Democrat in history. Trump’s chance of victory rises and falls on the size of his margin among noncollege voters.

This has, as I argued over the weekend, gone hand-in-hand with Democrats emerging as a party of institutional guardians (albeit with quite left-wing views on economics and social issues) and the Trumpist G.O.P. emerging as a kind of counterrevolutionary party. But so many of the other divides we see are downstream of this divide, which has led to some policy and conceptual confusion in both parties. Who and what is the Democratic Party if it loses working-class voters? Who and what is the Republican Party as it begins to self-consciously try to represent blue-collar voters?

Ross: With the added question in this election of whether the Republicans can win back a slice of the broad American elite that basically united against Trump in 2016 and 2020. If Trump wins, Elon Musk and the emergent pro-Trump faction in Silicon Valley may be seen as harbingers of a (very modest) elite realignment, where the G.O.P. wins back some slice of the tech and business-class types that it’s been losing. If Trump loses … well, it will be interesting to see what becomes of what you might call the SpaceX Right in a Harris administration.
Nov. 5, 2024, 6:38 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
Why Are Our Elections Always Nail-Biters?
Image
Credit...Mark Peterson for The New York Times

Aaron: The political scientist Lee Drutman had an essay on his Substack recently in which he talked a lot about minimal winning coalitions, an idea made famous by the political scientist William Riker in the 1960s. In an era of polarization, both parties seem to be trying to grind it out, and just get across the finish line. There are logical reasons for this (fewer voters you have to take care of later), but why aren’t the parties, particularly the Republicans, trying to win big anymore? Where are the near-total blowouts? There have been two in my lifetime, if not yours. What gives?

Ezra: Oh, good, a question that demands a whole book written in response! A few things: “Parties” don’t choose candidates, primary voters do. So I’m not sure there’s a party that plots a strategic course. Democrats got closer to that this year than anyone expected, in pushing Biden to step aside, but that was all the energy the party had: The coalescence around Harris was immediate; there was no soup-to-nuts rethinking of the party’s approach to maximize competitiveness.

And Republicans were even further from choosing some kind of optimal strategy: Trump fully owns the desiccated husk that was once the Republican Party — Lara Trump is now the R.N.C. co-chair! — and he does what he wants with it. It doesn’t make sense to look at the Republican Party and say it is “trying” to do anything. Trump does things, and what is left of the Republican Party falls in line.

I think the mystery here is why American politics remains so competitive, given how wild some of the decisions that Republicans, in particular, have made. One theory is that if Republicans had acted strategically this year, they’d be running away with this election, as opposition parties have been doing all over the world. I’m a tad skeptical that the closeness is simply a Trump penalty: We’re not seeing an anti-incumbent mood or anti-Democrat mood among governor or Senate or House elections, and Trump is running ahead, at least in polls, of many Republican Senate candidates.

Ross: There’s a general dynamic where the two parties are too institutionally weak to select candidates in smoke-filled rooms with an eye toward electability, but are also sufficiently professionalized (relative to the old days) when it comes to polling and turnout strategies and microtargeting that you just can’t get the old-school 60-40 blowout elections, in which one side just collapses. There also does seem to be some psychological principle at work, where the substitution of politics for religion and other forms of meaning seems to resolve itself naturally into 50-50 deadlocks — but that’s for sociologists and philosophers to explain.

With Trump specifically, though, I don’t think there’s a great mystery: What he taketh away from the G.O.P. with wild behavior, he giveth back with an instinct toward moderation and outright pandering to the median voter. The Republican Party of Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan was more respectable but more ideologically extreme in its economic agenda, while Trump has consistently pushed the G.O.P. that he dominates toward the center. You like Social Security? He’ll protect it. You’re pro-choice? Actually, he’s a little pro-choice, too! You want the full SALT deduction back, even though it was Trump himself who cut it? He’ll give it to you. He is personally extreme but his policy instinct is always to reach for more voters than the G.O.P. of 2012, and that helps keep the 50-50 equilibrium in place.

Ezra: There’s been a lot of reliance on the median-voter-theorem in political punditry this year, and I stand athwart it yelling “Stop!” Most voters know the headline policies of the candidates, if that. Donald Trump is running on a 10 percent tariff on all imported goods, a 60 percent tariff on all imported goods from China and mass deportations. Trump may say he opposes a national abortion ban, but he is the president who appointed the justices that overturned Roe. Whatever you want to call that, it’s not what we would traditionally have called moderation. And comparatively, I do not think his position on the SALT deduction is well known.

I think there’s much about Trump’s appeal that liberals underestimate, but I don’t think he is tightly aligning himself to the median voter on policy — and we know Trump’s coalition is built on voters who pay somewhat less attention to politics. I guess another way to come at this, though, is to say that whatever Trump is or isn’t, he proved in 2016 that his brand of politics can win over about half the country. If he’d only won 40 percent, he wouldn’t be around to run again, and if he could win 60 percent, he wouldn’t have lost re-election. Tautologically, it’s 50-50 because it was 50-50 from the launch.



Nov. 5, 2024, 6:03 p.m. ET Nov. 5, 2024

Ross DouthatEzra Klein and Aaron Retica
What Kind of World Are We Living In?

Aaron Retica: Welcome to our live conversation with Ross Douthat and Ezra Klein. I will be asking some questions I have, Ross and Ezra may well ask each other questions, and we will have some questions from readers, too.

Ezra, you and I were talking earlier this year about whether 2024 was going to be like 1968, whether this was going to be a Hobbes election or a Locke election, back when Joe Biden was still the candidate. A war of all against all or a constitutional procession.

But here’s the weird thing. Donald Trump ended up in a Hobbes world. Two assassination attempts, one of them inches away from succeeding. Kamala Harris ran more of a Lockean campaign. It was as if they were in different worlds. What happened?

Ross Douthat: Hobbes and Locke are both fundamentally modern liberals, Aaron — where’s the Plato option? The Aquinas Strategy?

Aaron: I was going to try to work in some lines from St. Paul, if that’s any solace to you.

Ross: To try to answer in the spirit of the question, I might frame the 2024 election this way: The promise of Joe Biden in 2020 was that a vote for him was a vote to restore the politics of normalcy, which we can call Lockean if you like — bipartisan deal-making in Washington, D.C., support for the American-led liberal international order, uplifting presidential rhetoric. And the big problem for the Democrats in 2024 has been that the world seemed instead to grow more Hobbesian on Biden’s watch, whether in the chaos along the U.S.-Mexico border, the aggression of Vladimir Putin and the conflict in the Middle East, or the return of real inflation after a roughly 40-year hiatus. Liberalism promised normalcy and seemingly didn’t deliver — so it’s no wonder that the more Hobbesian-minded candidate has a chance to return to the White House, promising governance suited to “continual fear,” the “danger of violent death” and other “nasty, brutish” conditions.

Ezra Klein: I think it’s worth cleaving the substance from the aesthetics here. I just had Jon Stewart on the podcast, and it had me thinking about the famous Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear. As time went on, that became the aesthetic of the two sides: Democrats sell themselves as the party of sanity, of institutions, of “in this house we believe science is real”; Republicans sell themselves as the party of fear, of “American Carnage,” of “they’re eating the pets.” On the one side, Democrats promise to restore Roe; on the other side, Republicans promise mass deportation.

Then there’s the substance. I think Ross is right when he says Democrats have suffered from a promised normalcy that never came. But there’s a convenient forgetting of the final year of the Trump presidency: a mass pandemic Trump badly mishandled, morgues full of bodies, cities locked down and an utterly overmatched president who blathered through his own press conferences while turning the actual governing over to the governors. The country is far calmer and safer today than it was in 2020. And that’s to say nothing of Jan. 6 and all that Trump did before and after it to subvert the election. Memories in politics are short. Even George W. Bush has seen his image somewhat rehabilitated!

Ross: I’m not sure it’s so much that Trump gets a pass on the pandemic — though there clearly is a sense in which some voters regard it as more an act of God than of misgovernance — as that the memory of 2020 ends up indicting both political parties: Trump for pandemic fecklessness followed by the disgrace of Jan. 6, but the liberal coalition for its own spate of madness, its attempt to force through a cultural revolution that contributed mightily to rising homicide rates, its embrace of all sorts of radical ideas that clearly shadow and hamper Harris’s presidential campaign four years later.
