Here are some of my takeaways regarding the recent two German state elections. TL;DR: I stand by everything I said before German politics, and more.

During these elections, in Sachsen and Thüringen the far-right AfD came in first and a close second, while the other far-right (yes, far-right) party, the Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance, came in a strong third. The traditional centrist parties, with the exception of the right wing CDU took a massive beating.

Before anyone would panic, these two federal states are tiny: Thüringen has a population of 2 million, Sachsen 4 million. Germany's total population is 84 million.

That being said, the far-right is clearly rising across the board, which is a big problem. An even bigger problem is that establishment parties have no response to it, and are slowly dying (SPD, FDP, Grüne), or themselves radicalizing to the far-right (CDU, CSU).

Naturally, the far-right AfD would need a leftist antithesis, which simply doesn't exist (yet). The BSW (Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance) is said to be "far-left", but I consider that journalistic malpractice. The BSW opposes non-white immigration, and is very pro-Russia, in addition to being self-proclaimed nationalists among other things. These are far-right values.

The BSW as a party grew out by seceding from the Linke (Left) party, which, as I said in the past, also isn't a real leftist movement. Surely enough, the moment the far-right BSW was formed, the Linke voter base collapsed immediately to less than half. Some leftist movement that is: the members of which switching to the far-right at a drop of a hat. The Linke party itself was also pro-Russia, anti-Ukraine, anti-US, and so on.

Germany is suffering from the exact same problem every other Western European country is suffering from:

- There are problems, such as the cost of living crisis, or concerns about immigration.

- The centrist parties have been unable to solve the problems, and in some cases only made it worse. Consequently people do not trust them anymore.

- Populist parties feel fresh and new, drawing in disillusioned voters. However, we only have right wing populist parties, the left is almost completely absent.

- A left populist party would have to offer leftist solutions to problems: Cost of living crisis - let's decommodify parts of our economy, turning them into nonprofit public services. Immigration - let's have common sense immigration policies at manageable numbers, but let's also understand that the world is divided into the top 1% and everyone else, not to races. Growing wealth inequality - we're gonna democratize the economy baby, all workers will be board members, and billionaires will be banned, any net worth above 999M will get a 100% tax rate, and so on.

As long as our two choices are:

A) more of the same, i.e. the slow, downward spiral,
or
B) a supposed glorious return to some smoothbrained 1950s-esque white ethnostate utopia,

and there is no alternative, i.e. a leftist party, as long as such a movement doesn't exist, our elections will continue to look like this: every single one will be another death battle for our democracies, to try and see whether the disappointing, exhausted centrist parties can claw together uneasy alliances every few years, just big enough to stop the far-right from taking over.

People need to be inspired. They must be presented a new narrative, a new worldview, new things to look forward to. The far-right manages to do this with fake promises about a return to an imaginary, glorious past. The left could inspire people with things that are true, for a change. Promising to finish the project of the Enlightenment, having begun centuries ago, by enacting its final promise: democracy in the economy. We're gonna bring down the cost of living, decommodify large swaths of the housing market and the energy sector, we're gonna give workers democratic control over corporations, and we'll end the reign of above-the-law billionaire oligarchs who hoard an ever-larger proportion of our countries' wealth, making all of us poorer. We, <insert leftist party name>, will do all that, so vote for us, not the fake populist far-right, obsessed with pointless culture war issues.

I believe this is the only long-term way to save our democracies, and YOU can also be a part of this, by adopting the above-mentioned cool, leftist values, learning how to speak publicly, and joining a viable, local political party that would be the most receptive to these values. The more minds you change, and the more of your buddies you bring in (ones who agree with you), the more leftward any party shifts, giving you (us) a shot at building a true leftist populist party, with viable, popular policies and solutions, which can be an antithesis to the far-right culture war type populism. The long-term alternative, I'm convinced, is the loss of our democracies, so take your pick accordingly.

And seriously, if you're considering partaking in politics, LEARN PUBLIC SPEAKING SKILLS. It's an incredibly low-hanging fruit. Most established veteran politicians couldn't chortle out a coherent paragraph without a teleprompter if their lives depended on it, and their oratory energy would put a rabid horde of coked-out chimpanzees to sleep. In some political environments a fun, energetic, memorable and rousing speech would instantly propel anyone to national fame. It would be nice if the person giving such a speech would be someone other than Viktor Orban for once.
