Opinion

Guest Essay
Harris Is Good on Abortion Rights. Now She Needs to Take It to 11.
Sept. 15, 2024

By Cecile Richards

Ms. Richards is a former president of Planned Parenthood.

Among the many critical issues at stake in the 2024 election, one will be central for many Americans: Whom do you trust to make medical decisions — women and their doctors, or Donald Trump and JD Vance?

Vice President Kamala Harris cast the issue of abortion in stark relief in her first debate with former President Trump last week, striking a chord with voters across political lines. Ms. Harris’s answers on abortion emerged as her strongest moments onstage in a strong night for her overall — and provided a glimpse of a winning strategy for this election.

That involves the Harris-Walz ticket turning the volume up to 11 on abortion. Ms. Harris, Gov. Tim Walz and their campaign surrogates must keep emphasizing — on the stump, in ads and at every chance they get — how Mr. Trump and Mr. Vance are impossible to trust on these issues.





















































































Tom J
Berwyn, ILSept. 15

The Court overturned a 50-year-old right and that means they'll do anything. So for me this is not just a women's health issue, it's a human rights issue. We need to find a way stop them.
Deirdre commented September 15
Deirdre
Deirdre
New JerseySept. 15

That age old election question, are you better off today than four years ago, is easy to answer-  

No we are not better off, because Donald Trump put 3 judges on the Supreme Court who overturned Dobbs and as a result 22 states have banned abortion making it more risky to be pregnant and  dangerous if you suffer a miscarriage.

Now Donald Trump wants to be president again- to put more judges in place who will take more rights away and make permanent in the courts what they cannot do through legislation.

Nothing is more important than voting Nov5.  Vote blue up and down ballot, especially in those 22 abortion banking states.  Let your legislature know they went too far by voting them out.
chemteach commented September 15
c
chemteach
tennSept. 15

I'm an old man who won't be affected directly by any abortion laws. Yet, I believe this is the most important issue in the election because it defines the Republican party and its antipathy toward women, as well as its general attitute about personal rights.
Deirdre commented September 15
Deirdre
Deirdre
New JerseySept. 15

@Nancy Lawrence
Access for exceptions are where American women are failed.  They can’t get care for an unviable fetus discovered at 20 weeks-  women are forced to carry term, bury their baby, pay for the delivery, recover from the trauma and survive 20 additional weeks knowing the baby they are carrying will die.  

Imagine being  asked every day when  you are due, knowing your baby will die, and no doctor will help you due to bans.

Women in Europe are cared for at every stage but American women are abandoned.
inner city girl commented September 15
i
inner city girl
PennsylvaniaSept. 15

@Edward I disagree. A women’s access to basic health care during pregnancy should not depend on where she lives. Pregnancy is not all balloons and gender reveal parties.
Metastasis commented September 15
M
Metastasis
OilistanSept. 15

The Republican Party believes in government control of a woman’s medical decisions and forced birth.

Let’s not forget Republicans are also discussing banning of contraception: forced pregnancy. They lecture women about abortion and are planning to take away the right to prevent unwanted pregnancy.

It makes me think the real goal is to make women chattel again.
Expat commented September 15
E
Expat
WIENSept. 15

@Nancy Lawrence Europe's limit of 16 weeks comes with massive safety nets for women, which do not exist for American women - universal healthcare, subsidized child care, no maternal healthcare deserts, etc.  So you can't really compare the two systems at all.
OnceACynic commented September 15
O
OnceACynic
BostonSept. 15

It's a basic human rights issue for women. It has to be decided at the federal level and not at the state level.
Lisa commented September 15
L
Lisa
Cheshire, EnglandSept. 15

@George

 Agree with your assessment. As a practicing Catholic who believes reproductive rights are a personal issue that no man should be in control of, I also think about why we do not argue about all the children brought into this world without a social safety net and the cost to the public.

This means families who feel pressured by their faith to have a child but cannot afford it nor give them the right amount of parental attention because they have to work multiple jobs, nor provide them with adequate medical care if need be?  What happens to the future of these children who do not have a positive start in life? Does the Pro Life movement ever consider this quality of life when they promote 'life?' 

I also think it is unconscionable that men - who are the instigators of unwanted pregnancies either through irresponsibility, cohersion, or sexual assault - believe that they should decide what a woman should do because of THEIR sex's own actions. How dare they make women feel that it is entirely 'their fault.' If men gave birth, this wouldn't even be a political issue.
Martin A commented September 15
M
Martin A
Croton on Hudson, NYSept. 15

The point that needs to be hammered is that Trump cannot be trusted to be reliable with abortion when his public position on it flip-flops with the wind.  Trump's current go-to of "leaving it to the states" (something apparently embraced by @Edward) is precisely the argument that Stephen Douglas made about slavery in his debates with Abraham Lincoln in 1858.
DL commented September 15
D
DL
PASept. 15

@Edward Where are women a majority of state legislators? It’s wonderful to claim that women have power…but we don’t have it where it matters for reproductive rights.
SMS45 commented September 15
SMS45
SMS45
Coral Springs, FLSept. 15

Abortion access is indeed very important.  But, there is a more important issue here.  Women's reproductive rights are civil rights.  Civil rights should never be determined by states and they cannot be allowed or denied on the basis of a popularity contest.  Nine states refused to ratify the 13th and 14th Amendments.  The former made slavery illegal and the latter gave anyone born in the USA citizenship.  Eight states refused to ratify the 15th Amendment which gave all male citizens, regardless of race, religion, or former servitude, the right to vote.  Given past actions by certain states to curtail voting rights by various means, it should be very clear that the states cannot be entrusted with civil rights.
Bee commented September 15
B
Bee
PASept. 15

@George when I was out canvassing in PA last weekend, we asked people to tell us what they thought were the most important issues this cycle. 9 out of 10 said abortion rights. Old and young women, old and young men, married women, college age kids, they all brought it up. Its an issue that we have to acknowledge is not only a health equity issue, it's also economic. People understand if they can't control this basic aspect of life, their education, earnings, and ability to care for other family members will be affected. 
I understand your concern, but I think we need to move past treating this as a side issue. It should be no different than talking about the economy or immigration.
RoberTo commented September 15
R
RoberTo
Walnut CreekSept. 15

Yes, and how bout reminding voters that all three of Trump’s Supreme Court nominees testified under oath at their confirmation hearings that they considered Roe settled law.
the more I love my dogs commented September 15
t
the more I love my dogs
MassachusettsSept. 15

@Edward 
Emphasizing the diversity of the 50 states doesn't mean that 50% of the population of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA should expect their rights to be squashed. All of us have rights and in the current climate, there's a small percentage of the population inflicting their beliefs and mind set on everyone else, and deciding who has rights.
mcomfort commented September 15
mcomfort
mcomfort
mplsSept. 15

She should start giving examples.  Here's one.

A women being stopped at the airport of a state where abortion has been outlawed because her rapist called in an amber-alert type of warning that she was trying to leave the state for an abortion.

When states make certain state roads legally free of 'abortion trafficking,' that's not just a decorative, symbolic law.  It goes along with another set of laws waiting in the wings -  the ability for a man or clergy to call a sort of abortion 'amber-alert' (named something else) if a woman is trying to leave that state to have an abortion.  

A pregnant woman could then legally be pulled over on that stretch of highway and brought back to their menfolk, or eventually stopped at an airport in that state.

This is real, this is a multi-part strategy that various far-right foundations want to put in place eventually.  It's real, and in the works.
Rich M commented September 15
R
Rich M
Raleigh NCSept. 15

And think that it was only four years ago that the MAGA crowd was marching in the streets shouting “my body, my choice” when it involved Covid mandates for masks and vaccines.
Beth commented September 15
B
Beth
Anywhere But hereSept. 15

Just like slavery could not be left up to the states, neither can abortion. Plain and simple. Both are human rights issues. It’s mind boggling that people can’t see the obvious.
Tim Clair commented September 15
T
Tim Clair
Columbia MDSept. 15

@Edward I agree that it is not a federal issue, but I must challenge your opening free assertion. Control of one's own body does not lie with any legislature, state or federal. Is it OK for one state to ban free speech, or the right to property, or freedom from religion? Is that "up to the states too?"
Liesa commented September 15
L
Liesa
Birmingham, ALSept. 15

A suggestion:  When you talk about abortion and rape victims, do not use the language of those who believe a child is instantly created at conception by saying things like:" forced to carry the child"  Or "forced to have their rapist's child".  We are talking about interrupting a pregnancy well before the clump of tissue is a "child" or "baby".  Say, "end a pregnancy" instead.  Or a rape victim is forces to "remain pregnant"  Word choice really does matter.  And we should vehemently denounce the lies that dems are for late term abortions with no restrictions.  This is a pernicious lie that many people believe.   One last thing:  1/3 of all pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion in the first trimester.  Does this mean god is the world's most active abortionist?  It's ridiculous.  We are talking about clumps of tissue, not babies.
Cathy commented September 15
C
Cathy
RISept. 15

@Navacado Abortion, specifically, may not be a constitutional right, but equal protection under the law is. That is the clause under which RBG preferred that the court had decided Roe, rather than focusing on privacy. Abortion is about equal rights. No one tells  men what to do with their bodies.
Tom commented September 15
T
Tom
MassachusettsSept. 15

Even this is not enough. We need to boldly affirm the right of women to terminate their pregnancy no matter what! Not for desperate medical reasons, not because of rape, but just because it is their personal and sacred choice. Let's not be shy. A fetus is NOT a person.
MA commented September 15
M
MA
Brooklyn, NYSept. 15

@Tom J "The Court overturned a 50-year-old right and that means they'll do anything. "

Good point; it's not just about abortion, it's about the Supreme Court's decisions now reflecting the demands of a portion of the electorate, responding to campaign initiatives of the elected officials that appoint and approve them, and not reflecting a thoughtful consideration of the constitution and prior precedents.

Effectively, the Supreme Court is an elected body, it's just elected in a bizarrely haphazard way that's indirect.  

The only solution is for Republicans to lose so many presidential elections that they can no longer influence this body.  That will take a decades but 2024  would be a start.
GBR commented September 15
G
GBR
The NortheastSept. 15

@Edward 
Fundamental rights - such as bodily autonomy and/or freedom from enslavement - should not be left up to the states. There is no state that mandates an American do something as simple and noninvasive as donate blood if another human  is in need; it’s mind-boggling that some states now mandate an American continue to use their internal organs as an incubator if another human is in need.
mosenblum commented September 15
m
mosenblum
IllinoisSept. 15

I find it hard to get my head around why any self-respecting woman are still planing to vote for Donald Trump and his misogynistic running when they have so clearly displayed their utter disrespect for women and their rights for self-determination.

I hope that the polls prove to be wrong when they predict of a neck-to-neck race.  Because women comprise the majority of American voters, it will be of no surprise to me when they  come out in droves on November 5 and deliver a strong rebuke to those male Republican extremists who are out to put "women in their place" once again.
Bill commented September 15
B
Bill
Ithaca, NYSept. 15

Trump cannot be trusted on abortion. He cannot be trusted on any issue that the majority of Americans want enacted. He will enact project 2025, which the majority of Americans do not support. Trump appointed Federalist Justices who overturned Roe v Wade and will support legislation to implement Project 2025, just as they did with the Dobbs decision.
Jerry Sturdivant commented September 15
J
Jerry Sturdivant
Las VegasSept. 15

Why is there a "Position" on a healthcare item? Why is it considered Left, or Liberal, to want control over your own body? Do we have a fight about men's rights? About men's control of their own bodies? They're making a problem where none should exist.
Joyce commented September 15
J
Joyce
DelawareSept. 15

Abortion is only part of this issue. The REAL issue is, women having the RIGHT to make their own health care decisions. I feel like we are living in the late 1800's. The Republicans want more than happy to take away our Rights. Vote accordingly, I am voting Blue 2024. I would like to vote again in the future.
PH PhD commented September 15
P
PH PhD
ColoradoSept. 15

Yes, Ms. Harris and Mr. Walz MUST turn the volume up to 11. Raise the roof. 

This line struck me: "When asked whether [Trump] would sign a national abortion ban, his answers are unintelligible." ALL of Trump's answers before, during, and after the debate were, are, and have been unintelligible. His response to healthcare demonstrated all I needed to know about his abilities to govern for all the people, and while his response revealed nothing new, his lame answer that he has "concepts of a plan" says it all. 

He's not walking a line on abortion, fine or otherwise; he's lying about abortion. But then, whenever he opens his mouth, a lie comes out. Or a dodge of responsibility. When asked about any regrets about his response to 6 January, he sounded like Bart Simpson, "I didn't do it. Nobody saw me do it. You can't prove anything.”
Mena commented September 15
M
Mena
MASept. 15

@Sumud Support of respecting all life in law and welcoming all in birth is indeed anti-woman and anti-rights. It is not being normal and humane. No woman wants to go through an abortion. This is one of the hardest decisions a woman has to make in her lifetime.  Leave the law and religious decisions away from it. Leaving women in peace would be the only moral and humane appropriate action from all of us who are not part of this decision.
Spencer commented September 15
S
Spencer
St. LouisSept. 15

@Scott   It is sad and tragic to see such little focus placed on children who die from gun violence, now one of the leading causes of death in children.  The republicans and “pro-life” crowd refuse to address this, preferring instead, to make easier to obtain a firearm, including assault rifles.  If one thinks this does not have deep emotional, mental health, and existential consequences to society as a whole, they are deeply and severely mistaken.
TastetheDifference commented September 15
T
TastetheDifference
Cwmbran, UKSept. 15

Why do Republicans insist that abortions are happening right up to the day of birth?

Most abortions happen early, and later abortions are for medical reasons. 

It never was a choice of whimsy to get pregnant and decide you don't want it the day before delivery. Never happened.
Sara G2 commented September 15
S
Sara G2
CTSept. 15

I hope that the media and Democrats keep on explaining the many examples of what encompasses reproductive care: miscarriage management, ectopic pregnancies, rape and incest, sepsis (to name a few). It illuminates the negative effects of forced birth on girls, women and families.
TastetheDifference commented September 15
T
TastetheDifference
Cwmbran, UKSept. 15

If America wants a strong economy, they should look after the 50% that are women. Working women making career and family choices. Women paying tax dollars.

Women's rights. Women's health. Women's safety.
MScott commented September 15
M
MScott
New EnglandSept. 15

@Sumud 
How much respect does it show for the lives of girls and women to demand that they continue pregnancies that may compromise their health and future well-being? I know you speak for many when you privilege the rights of unborn potentialities over women who are pregnant. But proscribing a person's ability to make decisions about herself and her body is indeed anti-woman and anti-rights.
Brian L. commented September 15
B
Brian L.
Bethesda MDSept. 15

@SMS I agree that immigration is an important issue, but I don't want a leader who promises "mass deportations now!" And remember too that Trump scuttled a strong immigration and border security bill that was negotiated and supported by members of both parties in Congress.
Alice commented September 15
A
Alice
MidwestSept. 15

Until, and unless, the government creates laws that regulate what men can or cannot do with their bodies (any parts of them),  laws that address what women can or cannot do with their bodies must be completely off limits. 

As VP Harris so astutely asked Judge Kavanaugh at his SC hearing. 

Was there any such law, she asked, the government had in place to control any parts of a man's body?
He stammered, obfuscated and did not answer.

Abortion care encompasses far more gynecologic care than anti-abortionists realize. Or perhaps don't care about.

Until it could be their daughter/granddaughter/etc.........
Deirdre commented September 15
Deirdre
Deirdre
New JerseySept. 15

Abortion will not be settled until republicans lose the majorities in every  state legislature -  a very good effort to work on.

How is it possible that people keep voting for republicans in Florida, Texas and Tennessee who have failed them on the ACA, abortion, guns and schools?
Viola Anderson commented September 15
V
Viola Anderson
CanadaSept. 15

The current favourite argument of Conservatives playing defence on the abortion issue is that it has some importance, but not enough to be an election issue. Which is of course the exact opposite of the reason they spent the past umpteen years obsessing over it to persuade women and men to vote for Conservatives because, they claimed, any woman who ever had an abortion was guilty of murdering babies. So vote for Conservatives to prevent those dreadful victims of rape, incest, poverty, disastrous abusive relationships, religious pressure, prejudicial laws, and all the rest of the myriad pressures women deal with from doing anything about the single condition that impacts their entire lives. So, contrary to the Republican assertion that all of a sudden after Roe v Wade it no longer is important, it is in fact the single  issue on which women and anyone who claims to love them should decide their vote. Republican Conservatives and Trump made it that important. They cannot now deny its importance simply because with the collusion of a culturally Conservative Supreme Court majority they won a battle and now their enemies the cultural Liberals should stop fighting the fight the cultural Conservatives picked. They should not hold their breaths waiting for that fight to end. They wanted it; they got it.
Andy House commented September 15
A
Andy House
The Sane White NorthSept. 15

@S Dwight Pish, poffle, and poppycock.  The right to decide about one's own body is an INDIVIDUAL RIGHT  for every AMERICAN CITIZEN not some semi-right because one lives in this state or that state.
magpie commented September 15
m
magpie
DriggsSept. 15

@SMS There was a bipartisan immigration bill, Trump killed it, In 2016 he had a Republican Congress and did not pass immigration reform. He will not address it if he wins in 2024. He needs an enemy. That is how he controls his supporters. He has to have the "other" to point at. Solving the issue takes away his power.
Vortexmax commented September 15
V
Vortexmax
FlyoverSept. 15

@Edward we need an equal rights amendment that will make a women's health decisions protected nationwide in our federal constitution unambiguously.
MattieB commented September 15
M
MattieB
CTSept. 15

@Spencer Not to mention that the U.S. has one of the highest infant mortality rates of developed countries. Funny, I don't hear pro-lifers voicing any concern about that.
William commented September 15
William
William
MinnesotaSept. 15

Harris, more than any one in or out of public office, has ever articulated more effectively the imperative for the government to keep its hands off women's bodies. For at least a year before the start of her campaign, she gave impassioned talks to standing-room-only crowds on college campuses, honing a message that has supercharged every one of campaign speeches and energized all those in attendance. Everyone in her campaign realizes the power of her messaging, from Harris herself to the newest volunteer, who may have signed up primarily to support this issue in particular.
Navacado commented September 15
N
Navacado
MidwestSept. 15

@Dave 

This is a fair point. I had to end a pregnancy in the sixth month because my baby had severe heart and organ defects that could not be clearly seen sooner on ultrasounds. Most, if not all, later abortions are due to health issues and I agree that we should be able to speak to that.
Amy commented September 15
A
Amy
NCSept. 15

I agree and she should tie it to the economy. The 12 year old that is now a mother has now seen her educational attainment go down the tube and her ability to climb high will be difficult because of the child that she and her family must now care for. If Mississippi had spent more time worrying about attracting businesses and improving educational standards and less time on abortion access, there might be less poverty in the state. It’s amazing that Ted states haven’t caught on. 

Sending abortion rights to the states, just transfers decisions to another governmental body to make decisions that are not theirs to make. Kamala needs to hammer home that this is not a government decision.
Andy House commented September 15
A
Andy House
The Sane White NorthSept. 15

@Caleb Perhaps for you Caleb it is "the economy" but for many, many, MANY women it is "who gets to decide" reproductive HEALTH (all of it, not just termination decisions), doctors and patients or priests, pastors, pontificating politicians, and profit-seeking poltroons on the political right.
MattieB commented September 15
M
MattieB
CTSept. 15

@Jason McDonald CD If Trump wins the election, the possibility of a nationwide abortion ban is very real. Because it's not about "states' rights." It's about controlling women.
Nan Socolow commented September 15
Nan Socolow
Nan Socolow
West Palm Beach, FLSept. 15

Former President Trump's 3 SCOTUS appointments affirmed to the Senate that Roe v. Wade was settled in law.  We've seen that the MAGA appointed Justices were against Roe v. Wade when they rolled back the law in 2022.  Nothing is more important for American women today than voting against Trump's promises that women will have individual states rights to their health and reproductive care.
AR commented September 15
A
AR
NYSept. 15

@Erik Holm

The crises is that we are letting this play out while women and girls suffer. I don’t know if you can live with that, but I certainly can’t.
Claire commented September 15
C
Claire
OlympiaSept. 15

@hawk 

A woman in Mississippi has as much right to healthcare as a woman in California. This is not a state issue. Women's rights are human rights.
La Rana commented September 15
La Rana
La Rana
NYCSept. 15

There are so many issues over which the Harris/Walz ticket can go after Trump.  No campaign ever  has had the treasure trove of audio and video material  for producing  negative ads about a candidate and a campaign than the Democrats in this cycle. They could run ads all day. No narrative necessary. Just Trump being Trump, lying thousands of times and saying offensive outrageous things, unhinged and speaking nonsense.  Dems should be better at messaging and should be far ahead in the polls.
jabarry commented September 15
j
jabarry
MarylandSept. 15

The freedom of a woman to exercise control over her body versus the state exercising control over her body is a difference of epic proportions. It is a fundamental issue of liberty versus the oppression of an authoritative state.

This exercise of personal liberty in America should resonate with all Americans including men. Men should not dismiss this as an issue that does not affect them. We are talking about the exercise of personal freedom being taken away by force of law, a law imposed by a religious minority. If one freedom can be quashed other freedoms can be lost (consider that some states have already raised the issue of monitoring pregnant women and potentially restricting their freedom to cross state lines).

And while the freedom of a woman to control her own body is of paramount importance, there are other freedoms which are being threatened by Republicans. The 2025 Project (which Trump's disavowal of is but another of his lies) would reclassify federal employees as political appointees subject to the whim of the president. So all federal employees would lose their current freedom to conduct their work in the best interest of the public they serve and be forced to do the bidding of a president (no matter how detrimental to the public). And that bidding might include federal registering women of child-bearing age and monitoring and controlling their travel and medical needs.

Women's freedom to control their bodies is paramount but it is only one freedom at stake.
Cathy commented September 15
C
Cathy
RISept. 15

@Dave That's not what she said in the debate. She said she supports the protections that were in place under Roe. And don't believe the stories you hear about selective abortions after viability.
Susan commented September 15
S
Susan
ParisSept. 15

Trump has flip flopped for years about abortion, going from saying  “I’m very pro choice” in 1999 and supporting Planned Parenthood to saying “there has to be “some form of punishment” for women who seek abortions, and of course saying recently that he will be “great for women’s reproductive rights” and will pay for every woman’s IVF treatments. Of course the truth is Trump has no real interest or position on abortion or any other women’s health issue except a transactional one for votes. Once elected he’ll turn the “tedious” issue over to the anti-choice misogynists like J.D.Vance, 
Greg Abbott and their ilk in other state legislatures and you can be  sure that he’d sign a federal ban on abortion without hesitation.
American Abroad commented September 15
A
American Abroad
IcelandSept. 15

Two words: Supreme Court.  Harris needs to pound and pound again the alarm that if Trump wins he may well have the chance to appoint two more Supreme Court Justices to cement his MAGA grip on injustice. That very threat is what persuaded me to vote for Bill Clinton over the third party candidate Ross Perot, fearing George H.W. Bush would try to overturn Roe Vs. Wade.  It was a real threat given H.W. Bush had appointed Clarence Thomas, someone I could tell was bad news for our country. So, much as I desperately wanted a viable third party to break our monopolistic two party system, a problem central to our political dysfunction, I couldn't in good conscience risk those Supreme Court votes falling in the hands of Bush.  As it turned out, President Clinton appointed Ruth Bader Ginsberg.  Not too shabby a pick and a point that needs to be hammered from Harris speeches to memes to advertisements and I hope soon to be town hall meetings!
Joe commented September 15
J
Joe
WisconsinSept. 15

@Eugene Patrick Devany The repeal of Roe has been a classic example of the law of unintended consequences.  Women should not be suffering these horrors. 

And the "leave it to the states" logic is not logical.  Anything dealing with a citizen's right to privacy is a national matter and should be established in national law.
M. Toole commented September 15
M
M. Toole
Portland OregonSept. 15

Post-Dobbs has made it clear that abortion is health care.  And health care should not depend on the state you live in or the decisions of legislators.
Marty McFly commented September 15
M
Marty McFly
Keystone StateSept. 15

Leave it to the states?  Who are we kidding.  

Just look at fevered challenges abortion opponents are making to any referendums on the ballot this fall.  They know they will lose, overwhelmingly, when the voters get to decide, even in red states. 

So they’ll do everything in their power not to let the voting public express their opinion.  When they inevitably lose in all the states it appears on the ballot, they’ll challenge the results. If that fails, then bring some arcane lawsuit to a friendly judge in a viscous cycle of uncertainty.
A Reader commented September 15
A
A Reader
AnywhereSept. 15

@The Aardvark   Of course, the ability to control your body means that people can directly control the size of their families.  This ensures that the size of their families is commensurate with the housing and food costs they can afford.  Ultimately, the abortion issue does influence these pocketbook issues as well.
Rockysmycat commented September 15
R
Rockysmycat
MichiganSept. 15

Would it be too much of a push for her to say that women are not chattel and have the right to bodily Autonomy? Or even support another opportunity to pass the Equal Rights Amendment?
Name a better time to work toward them.
Em S commented September 15
E
Em S
Paradise, USASept. 15

@Joel Levine 
No, it isn't at all like the death penalty and it isn't at all simple, really. Abortion decisions are often very complicated for the woman and can be nuanced. Decisions often involve the life and health of the mother or the viability of the fetus. What it should never be, is up to anyone but the woman to decide. It's no one's business but hers.
LL commented September 15
L
LL
pnwSept. 15

@The Aardvark Apples and oranges. You're comparing a fundamental right to privacy guaranteed by the constitution, and prices of goods that a president has little control over. In continuing that false comparison, you  and others are muddying the waters. As a species, I'd like to think we can hold two ideas in our collective heads at the same time. Time will tell.
Liz3592 commented September 15
L
Liz3592
FloridaSept. 15

This is the approach that I take when trying to drum up support for Florida's abortion amendment  - I share my past pregnancy heartbreak and medical crisis, and explain that under the current abortion ban law doctors wouldn't necessarily have treated me in time to save my life. When confronted with medical examples of the challenges a strict abortion ban brings, even pro-life advocates begin to see things differently.
TMB commented September 15
T
TMB
Rhode IslandSept. 15

Abortion access is among the most important issues that needs to be decided and written into national law.  It is also the issue that best represents the two parties.  

Access to abortion signifies individual liberty that has no effect on any other person.  Republican's support for individual liberty revolves around personal choices that 
impact others, such as the "right" to bear arms, religious freedom, voter access, low taxes, etc.  

That basic difference between the blue and red parties must get broadcast so that voters who are, for example, religious, but want gun control see it.  It must be said that the Democratic belief is that they can be as pious as they like as part of a community of like minded people, but they may not push it, through government action, on others.  But, at the same time, their neighbor or themselves may own as many guns as they want, but the types and accessory equipment will be governed to provide for the safety of the community.
Concerned commented September 15
C
Concerned
Cambridge, MASept. 15

@Tom J 

Neighbors going door to door made a difference in South Dakota.

How can you and I support trusted peers that are engaging voters this summer and fall -- in the communities that will decide this issue?

Look up the grassroots groups listed at movement.vote.  At the Movement Voter Project's "partners/browse groups" tab you can see the Reproductive Justice orgs listed in each state.

When we wake up on Nov. 6, the amount of local outreach done by 100s of groups across ALL interest areas and constituencies will have been decisive in the outcomes.  

Will each of us be certain on Nov. 6 that we did all we could in September?
Martin A commented September 15
M
Martin A
Croton on Hudson, NYSept. 15

@Navacado Leaving it to the states is not "a worthwhile position" precisely because of its tragic consequences. This is illustrated by the example in Ms. Richards's piece of 12-year old in Mississippi who was raped by a stranger and then required under state law  to become a parent in seventh grade.  That could be anyone's daughter or sister.
Laura commented September 15
L
Laura
MichiganSept. 15

@Edward The Center for Reproductive Rights has published a memorandum [https://www.reproductiverights.org/sites/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/factsheets/Constitutional-Protection-for-the-Right-to-Abortion-Fact-Sheet2.pdf] that succinctly yet thoroughly explains why abortion is "a fundamental liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution."

The memorandum reminds us that Roe was a corrective to one state legislature attempting to define abortion access on its own terms, despite your assertion that abortion is "an issue that lies in state legislatures." When Texas attempted to make that claim, Roe asserted that the decision to end a pregnancy is fundamental to a woman's personal liberty.

I live in Michigan, which has a population of 10 million. It is as nonsensical to imagine that 10 million strangers have the right to determine my degree of personal bodily autonomy as it is to imagine that 335 million strangers do. Both claims deny half of the United States population their Constitutional guarantee to what Roe correctly defined as a fundamental right.
Left-Handed Scissors commented September 15
L
Left-Handed Scissors
NYSept. 15

@Scott Are you at all concerned about the deep emotional, mental health, and existential consequences for women in America who have had their freedom stripped away from them? What about the consequences  to actual children who might lose their mother when she is forced to carry a pregnancy that is unsafe for her? Are you at all concerned about what we do as a society with thousands of children a year whose parents cannot care for them. Where are we going to house and care for these children? Think of the economic impacts. Who is going to pay for that? I'm sure the Anti-Freedom conservatives won't want to pay increased taxes to fund their care.
Incorporeal Being commented September 15
I
Incorporeal Being
NYCSept. 15

The promise of America is liberty and freedom for its citizens. However liberty and freedom cannot be enjoyed by Americans without control over their own bodies. It’s that simple. 

Abortion bans are incompatible with freedom. Forcing women to carry unwanted or unsafe pregnancies is immoral. Abortion bans are un-American in their essence. Freedom requires bodily autonomy.
deb commented September 15
d
deb
inWASept. 15

@William jenkins 

Then don't get an abortion. Here's the thing. We trust women and doctors to make these decisions, not politicians.

Harris IS courageous enough to address the values of trusting women with their own bodies. trump is lying when he says he won't sign a national abortion ban.
anniedooley commented September 15
a
anniedooley
GeorgiaSept. 15

She's done plenty enough, plus what Walz is doing. 

Women of child-bearing age already get it, especially those who are already mothers and know how the 24/7 responsibilities of child-rearing change your life in every imaginable way. 

What she might do, or Walz could do, is speak to men. Their lives too are seriously impacted by unplanned and unwanted pregnancies and the medical emergencies their pregnant wives suffer.
FW commented September 15
F
FW
West VirginiaSept. 15

Agree with all of this. One additional item, don’t let the mainstream media keep ignoring the Comstock Act. Its sitting there like Chekov’s gun  waiting for Trump (or the next Republican) to pick up yet all the discussion is about a hypothetical national abortion ban. We know Republicans will fight dirty on this issue and that the Republican Supreme Court will side with them.
SJC commented September 15
S
SJC
USASept. 15

@chemteach 
I’m an old woman and I second your comment.  I fought for women’s choice in the late 60’s and early 70’s and I’ll fight for it today.  We shouldn’t have to keep fighting over and over again about the same issue.
Diana commented September 15
D
Diana
USASept. 15

First, thank you, Ms. Richards, for your lifetime work on behalf of women and reproductive freedom!

This is THE SINGLE easiest issue to talk with others about.  I've found that even w/some of my friends who continue to be pro-GOP, they "get it" when I talk w/them about reproductive freedom.  And it is very easy to couch it in terms of "there are other ways of being pro-life without taking away women's freedom to have control over their own bodies."  

Amazingly, most of them have not heard the true life stories impacting women from these morally reprehensible state laws.  Once again, we can credit the non-news source called Fox.

Yes, Kamala and Tim should and will continue to press this.  But the rest of us can, too.
Ellyn H commented September 15
E
Ellyn H
PhiladelphiaSept. 15

This should have been the theme of VP Kamala Harris' answer to the first debate question, "Are Americans better off now than four years ago?" Assessing where we are isn't just about the sitting president. We're living with the damage Trump did to women's reproductive rights 4-8 years ago. So no, we're not better off as a society and this is the most impactful reason why. She  should be hammering this message.
Katherine commented September 15
K
Katherine
Denver, COSept. 15

@The Aardvark This is a hierarchy of needs thing: if fundamental rights (my bodily autonomy) are threatened, it goes to the top of the priority list. Housing access and food costs must be a very fast follow.
Terri commented September 15
T
Terri
AlabamaSept. 15

@A   This article and the election is all about who makes the choice.   She's NOT pro abortion.  She is pro-choice, there is a huge difference.  Choice means she believes women and the doctors should make their healthcare decisions, not the government.   States have already been floating monitoring pregnancies, a supreme count justice has mentioned women and taking away the option of birth control.  People need to understand what the Trump party will do to women's rights if they win.
Pat Baker commented September 15
P
Pat Baker
BostonSept. 15

I was visiting with in-laws who are pro-choice but with limitations.  However we all agree that Planned Parenthood and the other Abortion rights groups have errored in the message that abortion is only a woman's issue.  It is a family issue, men are impacted when there is an unplanned pregnancy or a dangerous pregnancy.  How many successful men are successful because they did not become a parent too soon?  How many families are intact because a dangerous pregnancy did not take a mother's life?  Harris and Waltz need to push this issue with male voters.
albrosseau123 commented September 15
a
albrosseau123
Wellington, ONSept. 15

"Take it to 11?!?!"

- What kind of society need to have such a basic right to be "taken to 11" to get people's attention?
- What's this obsession by too many to impose their morality on the rest? And they pretend to want less government?
- What's wrong with having a choice and leaving it to women's and their doctor?

As a former catholic, yesterday I disappointment but not surprised to hear Mr. Pope waddling into this. What about respecting common sense privacy and separation of church and state, especially in them middle of an election where abortion is a key subject? The catholic church should be denied its tax free status.
Andy commented September 15
Andy
Andy
Salt Lake City, UtahSept. 15

Talking directly about abortion makes a lot of sense to me. 

For one thing, it makes politicians like Trump extremely uncomfortable. He’s incapable of talking about women without objectifying them. A blunt conversation about abortion is deeply humanizing. Moreover, the “Leave It to Beaver” types get squeamish discussing female anatomy in any realistic terms. Half the room still powders their nose.

Second, abortion itself is a proxy for the real issue: personal autonomy. Abortion is the concrete example of government overreach and personal disenfranchisement. We should be using abortion to demonstrate how our freedom is violated, not pontificating about freedom in order to justify abortions.

It’s the difference between saying “pro-choice” and saying “No, really. I showed up at the *E.R.* and the doctors sent me away because of the abortion law.”
Anne in Maine commented September 15
A
Anne in Maine
MAINESept. 15

Almost 160 years ago the 13th Amendment to the US Constitution banned slavery in the US.

How can it be that over half the populations of US, women, are deprived of personal freedom?  I don't think anyone who does not want an abortion should be required to get one.  But certainly controlling my freedom to control my own body is a form of slavery.  I now live in a country where men are freer than women.  I, and all women in the US, are now slaves of the anti abortion movement .
Robert Perry commented September 15
R
Robert Perry
Simi ValleySept. 15

@MA 

Most people can hold more than one thought in their heads. Harris' position on the economy is a stark contrast to the massive inflation that would be created by Trump's tariff proposal.

I see two big reasons to vote for Harris over Trump. They are not mutually exclusive.
Frank Azzarto commented September 15
F
Frank Azzarto
Newton, MASept. 15

Kamala Harris refused to give a clear answer when it came to making a statement about at what point in the pregnancy she would say an abortion is not acceptable. 
Of course Trump made the outlandish claim that "killing" a delivered baby could be done. Nonsense.
But it would have been simple for Harris to reference the law in New York state about "when":
"§ 2599-bb. Abortion. 
1. A health care practitioner licensed,
certified, or authorized under title eight of the education law, acting within his or her lawful scope of practice, may perform an abortion
when, according to the practitioner's reasonable and good faith
professional judgment based on the facts of the patient's case: the
patient is within twenty-four weeks from the commencement of pregnancy,
or there is an absence of fetal viability, or the abortion is necessary
to protect the patient's life or health."
New York states when an abortion is needed: to "protect the patient's life or health" .
A patient's health is left up to the patient and doctor. 
Considering the nightmare that a woman has to deal with when her unborn child suffers from a serious medical condition or she is at risk of becoming mentally ill that decision can be made at least in the eighth month of a pregnancy when the fetus is clearly a child.
Harris could have stated that clearly. Instead she went into a bloody description of the worst issue a woman has to live.  
She showed no respect for women and the reality of an abortion they may face forever.
a guy commented September 15
a guy
a guy
from a purple stateSept. 15

I am inherently suspicious of a party that loves abortion. I know there are instances where this most difficult decision to abort must be made.
Last in Line commented September 15
L
Last in Line
Fools Paradise.Sept. 15

@Independent Observer They lied without lying:  “settled law” deliberately deceived people into thinking that meant they wouldn’t over turn it.
Jerry S commented September 15
J
Jerry S
AsharokenSept. 15

@Tom J it’s not just that this Court overturned a 50  year precedent, it’s that they dropped it like a stick of TNT in the middle of the town square and then sat back and watched! No consideration of the disastrous impact their decision might have on the American populace which could at least have provided a transition period. It proves their intention was not benign.
Jen commented September 15
J
Jen
RosevilleSept. 15

People should consider where these policies end.  Birth control, condoms, etc?  Nope.  Providing pain relief during childbirth?  Suffering is women's punishment for original sin.  Women dying in childbirth?  Gods will.  Equal rights?  Women belong to their husbands.  Education?  Women should learn to cook, clean and care for their children.  America is sounding more and more like the Taliban every day.  Republican women, be very careful what you wish for.
Otis commented September 15
O
Otis
Washington DCSept. 15

The GOP need to understand that women are voting for Harris because reproductive rights are the hill we could die on.  We are voting for our very lives.  

And we are voting to secure our great great great granddaughters futures.
Inky commented September 15
I
Inky
MESept. 15

The GOP wants to deny access to healthcare on the basis of gender, full stop. 

Harris made this clear in her questioning of Brett Kavanaugh.

The goal is to take away women’s autonomy. The GOP wants us out of government and out of the workplace—and in the kitchen raising children.

How women can vote Republican, I don’t understand. Every right and privilege they enjoy in our society, from the right to vote to access to birth control, from no fault divorce to having their own credit card, is a result of hard-won liberal policies.
Left-Handed Scissors commented September 15
L
Left-Handed Scissors
NYSept. 15

@MA VP Harris is more than capable of highlighting more than 1 issue as she campaigns. The economy and abortion are also not mutually exclusive. If, when, and how many children to have is probably the most profound economic issue for most families. You underestimate how angry women are about having their rights stripped away. People are not always honest with pollsters. Women may not feel comfortable saying what they are thinking aloud. They will speak in the voting both.
Left-Handed Scissors commented September 15
L
Left-Handed Scissors
NYSept. 15

@Linn  VP Harris has said she supports the restrictions of Roe v. Wade. Please give one example of any Democratic politician who has "done a happy dance" or "encouraged" abortion or suggested we "celebrate every abortion as a moral victory." Your words are insulting to every women who is fighting for her freedom to make choices about her uterus. No one wants an abortion. The procedure is painful. Women who have abortions are frequently carrying wanted pregnancies. There are so many reasons women might chose to terminate a pregnancy. And none of them are anyone else's business.
KV commented September 15
K
KV
BostonSept. 15

Jessica Valenti has been screaming this exact point over and over in her substack Abortion, Every Day. Each day she informs readers of what’s happening broadly, in the states, and at the national level. She has been saying since day 1. 

Americans are not divided on abortion and overwhelmingly and across party lines want the government out of those decisions. We were cowed and shamed for so long that politicians were timid. Let’s face it they were timid because they had bought into some of the prolife rhetoric whether they realized or not. 

It’s only since Dobbs that we have been able to unapologetically say, abortion is health care.  

Jessica’s book, “Our  Bodies, Their Lies, and the Truths We Use to Win” is available for preorder and comes out October 1st. 

People don’t fully know what’s happening. People don’t even know that miscarriage care and abortion care requires the same treatment and if there are no doctors to perform that procedure or who are afraid of being jailed, we get women being given riskier C-sections in early pregnancy or left untreated until nearer to death. This is happening and it’s not rare. We need to get the word out. 

This book can help spread that message and give us a shot at repairing the damage already done as well as preventing this attack of women and girls from succeeding.
Doug Ritter commented September 15
D
Doug Ritter
Rome ItalySept. 15

So one hand we have a candidate who is all in on women’s reproductive rights. On the other hand we have a team screaming daily about immigrants eating pets. Seems like an easy choice.
mancuroc commented September 15
m
mancuroc
rochester nySept. 15

Kamala Harris and the Dems need to be explicit about a major consequence of abortion bans: turning OB-GYNS into criminals.   

Doctors will seriously consider leaving states that threaten them with jail for intervening in problem pregnancies.  This will create OB-GYN deserts in those states and threaten the care of ALL women, regardless of whether a pregnancy is even involved.

Today is the first time I have heard this  point made even in the media, when Ali Velshi explicitly mentioned it on his MSNBC program.

12:15 EDT, 09/15
Jack Belicic commented September 15
J
Jack Belicic
Santa MiraSept. 15

The Dems have all this good material and do need to use it constantly. Want flip-flop data, just publish the timeline of Trump's unending revisions to his abortion views starring the repeal of Roe vs Wade. He has no real views, he will say and do anything to win 3 more votes; get that waitress vote, no tax on tips, get that worker vote, no tax on overtime, get that billionaire vote, no income tax at all, get that consumer vote, tariifs will pay for everything and the foreigners will pay for the tariffs and will not add them to the product pricing!!! Trump is the Miracle Man so of course God is on his side.
Robert Perry commented September 15
R
Robert Perry
Simi ValleySept. 15

There are so many reasons to vote blue this election, but reproductive rights is head and shoulders above the rest. I am  husband to my wife, father to my daughter, and uncle to all my nieces. Every American is personally affected by the horrendous Dobbs decision.

Pundits try to downplay it's importance, but this is the one issue that should drive everyone to the polls.

After all, if they can violate your privacy on this issue, what else are they willing to do? Read Project 2025 for the answer.
jdoe212 commented September 15
j
jdoe212
Florham Park NJSept. 15

Still, the party of "small government" wants to control the personal medical decisions of women. Medical decisions?
A woman's rights? Save the fetus, shoot the kids in school.
Yes, the citizens of the US are living a nightmare.
Joe Dokes commented September 15
J
Joe Dokes
Santa Rosa CASept. 15

You don’t want to poke the bear.  The recent passage of legislation in seven states to legalize abortion at any stage of pregnancy and for any reason will be a powerful issue for abortion opponents.
dlb commented September 15
d
dlb
Washington, DCSept. 15

Read the story in the link about the young girl who was raped in Mississippi.   That just made me furious.  And grateful to the docs who continue to stay in the Delta to provide the much needed care.  Peace and kindness to that young girl and her family.
Ricardo Garcia commented September 15
R
Ricardo Garcia
BostonSept. 15

This comes across as a mentally unstable, unhinged rant. The Supremes have declared Roe v Wade invalid and returned the issue to the states. This is hardly a key issue in the Presidential race. People want assurances that they can feed their families, not kill them off. Jeez.
Richard Ostheimer commented September 15
R
Richard Ostheimer
Youngstown, OHSept. 15

@Sumud Trump appointed the Supreme Court Justices  that he knew would scuttle Roe.  That makes him pro life, not the least pro life.  In addition, you've got the framing wrong.  So called pro life advocates have demonstrated they are really only pro birth.  After a child is born name one thing they advocate or do to nurture it.
Larry Bennett commented September 15
L
Larry Bennett
cooperstown nySept. 15

It's a woman's body and it's her right to choose. It's that simple. Anything else is just attempts at male domination.
jhm01 commented September 15
j
jhm01
Miami, FLSept. 15

Amnesty, acid and abortion - the only thing the Democratic Party truly truly supports. Think that was said in 1968 or 1972 and it’s true today.
How much money is made by this authors organization on abortions each year? Doesn’t she have a financial incentive to keep it going? 
I oppose abortion but believe we should allow it upto the 1st trimester, after that is should be rarer than chickens teeth. However let’s not pretend that this person has a financial incentive to keep it going as much as possible.
It would be like Pablo Escobar arguing to make drugs legal :)
eduKate commented September 15
e
eduKate
New YorkSept. 15

During the debate, Trump kept washing his hands of the abortion issue by saying that the states are making rules based on the will of the people in their state. The will of the  residents was not solicited and it was an uphill battle for those who fought having the government take over women's bodies. I would have liked it if V.P. Harris had immediately gone to the fact that Trump appointed Supreme Court Justices based on their promise to be anti-abortion. Those justices then washed their hands of the matter by leaving it to the states. VP Harris is doing a good job of continuing to bring the reality of anti-abortion laws directly to the voters.
Lynn Young commented September 15
L
Lynn Young
Colorado SpringsSept. 15

Full agreement, Cecile. I’ve worked with Planned Parenthood in the field. Here’s what I know:

No one wants to have an abortion.

No one knows when and if they will need an abortion.

No one knows what another person is going through or feels.

No one knows what they themselves will feel or do  if they face the need for an abortion (despite pre-held political beliefs.) 

Birth control fails.

Pregnancy is complicated (and abortion is ten times safer than giving birth.)

Abortion is about rights, access, freedom and wholeness = Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness for all. 

Women (and people who love them) WILL flood the voting booths voting for Harris-Walz.

Abortion matters—and it’s a family matter. Abortion rights  will animate the electorate creating a huge wave of BLUE. 

Pedal to the metal, turn it up to 11, pull out all the stops—and make abortion front and center in the next 52 days. 

Keep the drumbeat. Speak! Campaign Stories are powerful. Tell your story. VOTE blue. 

Let’s midwife a new era.
MScott commented September 15
M
MScott
New EnglandSept. 15

@William jenkins 
 It's profoundly discriminatory to deny a person the most basic constitutional rights based on her biology. To engineer that discrimination through a "state's rights" argument insults the founding principles those justices and politicians claim to hold so dear.
