Live
Updated 
Aug. 23, 2024, 6:47 p.m. ET6 minutes ago
Election Live Updates: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Suspends Campaign and Endorses Trump

Mr. Kennedy announced that he was pausing his troubled independent presidential bid during a news conference in Arizona, where Donald J. Trump will also host an event this evening. After accepting the Democratic nomination, Kamala Harris is looking to an intensive new phase of the race.

 Pinned
Rebecca Davis O’Brien
Jim Rutenberg

Rebecca Davis O’Brien and Jim Rutenberg
Here’s the latest on the presidential race.

Robert F. Kennedy Jr. suspended his independent presidential campaign and endorsed Donald J. Trump on Friday, the latest shift in a fast-evolving 2024 campaign.  

Mr. Trump, campaigning in Las Vegas, gushed about the endorsement. “That’s big,” he said, but in talking to reporters after the event, he declined to say if he would offer Mr. Kennedy a role in his administration if he is elected in November. Mr. Trump is heading to a rally in Glendale, Ariz., later Friday and would be joined by a “special guest,” his campaign said.

Jennifer O’Malley Dillon, chair of the Harris campaign, suggested in a statement that Kennedy supporters should turn to Ms. Harris. “For any American out there who is tired of Donald Trump and looking for a new way forward, ours is a campaign for you,” said the statement, which did not refer to Mr. Kennedy by name.

Mr. Kennedy’s withdrawal is not expected to affect the race substantially; polls have diverged on whether he pulled more potential voters from Mr. Trump or Ms. Harris.

His announcement came the morning after Vice President Kamala Harris closed her often jubilant nominating convention in Chicago with a sober-minded address that sought to establish her as uniquely qualified to lead and unify the country — and paint her opponent as divisive and dangerous.

After weeks with the political spotlight nearly all to herself, Ms. Harris is moving into an intensive new phase of the campaign against Mr. Trump, the fiercest combatant in American politics.

The Harris campaign has not announced her first post-convention campaign appearance. Nor has it announced when she will hold her first press briefing since Mr. Biden’s withdrawal from the race, even as Mr. Trump and his running mate, JD Vance, jab at her lack of engagement with reporters.

But preparations are already underway for what will be the next major marker in the campaign, a Sept. 10 Harris-Trump debate on ABC.

Here’s what else to know:

    Trump appears to mend fences in Georgia: Mr. Trump appeared to set aside years of animosity between himself and Gov. Brian Kemp of Georgia, at least momentarily, after the governor spoke out in support of the former president’s candidacy. Just three weeks after the former president called Mr. Kemp a “bad guy” who was hurting his efforts to win in Georgia, Mr. Trump told Fox News on Thursday: “I think we’re going to have a very good relationship with Brian Kemp.”

    A candidate with a platform: Mr. Trump is the first presidential candidate to have his own social media platform, Truth Social, which he used to provide real-time commentary during Ms. Harris’s convention speech. As she laced into him, he wrote in one post, in all capital letters, “Is she talking about me?” and then went into a posting storm against her and her running mate, Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota. Afterward, he went to another reliable platform, calling into Fox News with instant reaction.

    The Harris campaign’s pushback: Ms. Harris used a considerable portion of her Thursday night address to talk about her upbringing as the daughter of a father from Jamaica and a mother from India. Casting her mixed heritage as uniquely American, she appeared to be trying in part to inoculate herself from attacks by Mr. Trump, who made his political rise by questioning the citizenship of the first Black candidate to rise to the top of Democratic politics, Barack Obama. Ms. Harris will also have another means through which to promote her story: television ads, for which her campaign already plans to spend $370 million.

Neil Vigdor and Nicholas Nehamas contributed reporting.

