Biden’s Parting Gift to Ukraine Could Also Help Trump
Nov. 18, 2024
By Serge Schmemann
Editorial Board Member
Acceding to Ukraine’s longstanding pleas for permission to fire American missiles into Russian territory may be the last thing President Biden can do for the Ukrainians — or on any other foreign front, for that matter — before leaving office. That makes for dodgy optics, because it saddles an incoming administration with a policy shift Biden himself long resisted because he thought it carried too great a risk of plunging America into a direct confrontation with Russia.
But it was arguably something he would have done in any case, given that Russia was preparing to throw 10,000 imported North Korean troops into the war and had just launched its largest air attack on Ukraine in months.
The argument from Ukraine and its Western supporters is this: If Russia is not constrained in battering every corner of Ukraine, as it demonstrated on Sunday, why should Ukraine be constrained in its fight? The weapon in question, the Army Tactical Missile System (known as ATACMS, pronounced attack-ums), which Ukraine has already been using in Russian-occupied territory, has a relatively limited range of about 190 miles, but that would put a lot of Russian bases, ammunition storage areas and logistical hubs in range. It could be immediately useful in blunting the counteroffensive Russia is preparing to retake the chunk of territory Ukraine seized in the Kursk region. That is where the North Koreans are supposed to be deployed.
The argument against allowing long-range strikes with NATO missiles is that this is the one action against which Vladimir Putin has drawn an explicit red line. “This escalates tensions to a qualitatively new level,” said the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitri Peskov. That does not mean World War III, as Donald Trump’s allies have shouted, but Russia will most likely feel compelled to retaliate against the United States and its allies in some way, probably asymmetrically and indirectly, further escalating the conflict.
Military experts doubt that firing Western missiles into Russia — whether ATACMS or similar systems that Britain and France may now supply — will alter the course of the war any more than the other vaunted weapons the United States agreed to supply after an initial reluctance, like the Abrams tank or the F-16 jet fighter. Ukraine has already been firing its own drones deep into Russia, and it has been using ATACMS against Russian targets in Crimea and other occupied territories. Russia, meanwhile, is still steadily grinding forward at a rate of up to a mile a day in the Donetsk region.
In any case, Trump will be able to return to a red light on the ATACMS when he takes office on Jan. 20. During the campaign, he declared that he would promptly end the war, though he never made clear how. Kremlin-allied commentators tried to get Trump’s ear by claiming that Biden’s decision reduced his negotiating options and left him with the threat of a global standoff.
But then Biden’s last act on the international stage may also help the Ukrainians persuade Trump that if they are properly armed and can stand up to Russia, a negotiated settlement becomes more likely.
Serge Schmemann joined The Times in 1980 and worked as the bureau chief in Moscow, Bonn and Jerusalem and at the United Nations. He was editorial page editor of The International Herald Tribune in Paris from 2003 to 2013.