archive.today
webpage capture
	Saved from	
no other snapshots from this url
	
22 Nov 2024 15:27:55 UTC
All snapshots	from host www.cnbc.com
WebpageScreenshot
sharedownload .zipreport bug or abuse
Skip Navigation
For Investing Club members: Watch Cramer’s Morning Meeting live
logo
logo
Markets
Business
Investing
Tech
Politics
Video
Investing Club
Join IC
PRO
Join Pro
Livestream
Watchlist
SIGN IN
Create free account
Finance
‘I have no money’: Thousands of Americans see their savings vanish in Synapse fintech crisis
Published Fri, Nov 22 2024•10:00 AM EST
thumbnail
Hugh Son
@hugh_son
Key Points

    Thousands of Americans will receive little or nothing from savings accounts that were locked during the collapse of fintech middleman Synapse.
    Customers believed the accounts were backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
    CNBC spoke to a dozen customers caught in the predicament, people who have lost sums ranging from $7,000 to well over $200,000.
    While there’s not yet a full tally of those left shortchanged, at fintech Yotta alone, 13,725 customers say they are being offered a combined $11.8 million despite putting in $64.9 million in deposits.

Smart technology. Connecting the future. Lifestyle and technology. Cyber crime. Online privacy protection. Data protection. Futuristic concept.
Oscar Wong | Moment | Getty Images
For 15 years, former Texas schoolteacher Kayla Morris put every dollar she could save into a home for her growing family.
When she and her husband sold the house last year, they stowed away the proceeds, $282,153.87, in what they thought of as a safe place — an account at the savings startup Yotta held at a real bank.
Morris, like thousands of other customers, was snared in the collapse of a behind-the-scenes fintech firm called Synapse and has been locked out of her account for six months as of November. She held out hope that her money was still secure. Then she learned how much Evolve Bank & Trust, the lender where her funds were supposed to be held, was prepared to return to her.
“We were informed last Monday that Evolve was only going to pay us $500 out of that $280,000,” Morris said during a court hearing last week, her voice wavering. “It’s just devastating.”
The crisis started in May when a dispute between Synapse and Evolve Bank over customer balances boiled over and the fintech middleman turned off access to a key system used to process transactions. Synapse helped fintech startups like Yotta and Juno, which are not banks, offer checking accounts and debit cards by hooking them up with small lenders like Evolve.
In the immediate aftermath of Synapse’s bankruptcy, which happened after an exodus of its fintech clients, a court-appointed trustee found that up to $96 million of customer funds was missing.
The mystery of where those funds are hasn’t been solved, despite six months of court-mediated efforts between the four banks involved. That’s mostly because the estate of Andreessen Horowitz-backed Synapse doesn’t have the money to hire an outside firm to perform a full reconciliation of its ledgers, according to Jelena McWilliams, the bankruptcy trustee.
But what is now clear is that regular Americans like Morris are bearing the brunt of that shortfall and will receive little or nothing from savings accounts that they believed were backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
The losses demonstrate the risks of a system where customers didn’t have direct relationships with banks, instead relying on startups to keep track of their funds, who offloaded that responsibility onto middlemen like Synapse.
Zach Jacobs, 37, of Tampa, Florida helped form a group called Fight For Our Funds after losing more than $94,000 that he had in a fintech savings account called Yotta.
Zach Jacobs, 37, of Tampa, Florida helped form a group called Fight For Our Funds after losing more than $94,000 that he had in a fintech savings account called Yotta.
Courtesy: Zach Jacobs
‘Reverse bank robbery’
There are thousands of others like Morris. While there’s not yet a full tally of those left shortchanged, at Yotta alone, 13,725 customers say they are being offered a combined $11.8 million despite putting in $64.9 million in deposits, according to figures shared by Yotta co-founder and CEO Adam Moelis.
CNBC spoke to a dozen customers caught in this predicament, people who are owed sums ranging from $7,000 to well over $200,000.
From FedEx drivers to small business owners, teachers to dentists, they described the loss of years of savings after turning to fintechs like Yotta for the higher interest rates on offer, for innovative features or because they were turned away from traditional banks.
One Yotta customer, Zach Jacobs, logged onto Evolve’s website on Nov. 4 to find he was getting back just $128.68 of the $94,468.92 he had deposited — and he decided to act.
Zach Jacobs decided to act after logging onto Evolve’s website on Nov. 4 to find he was getting just $128.68 of his $94,468.92 in deposits.
Zach Jacobs decided to act after logging onto Evolve’s website on Nov. 4 to find he was getting just $128.68 of his $94,468.92 in deposits.
Courtesy: Zach Jacobs
The 37-year-old Tampa, Florida-based business owner began organizing with other victims online, creating a board of volunteers for a group called Fight For Our Funds. It’s his hope that they gain attention from press and politicians.
So far, 3,454 people have signed on, saying they’ve lost a combined $30.4 million.
“When you tell people about this, it’s like, ‘There’s no way this can happen,’” Jacobs said. “A bank just robbed us. This is the first reverse bank robbery in the history of America.”
Andrew Meloan, a chemical engineer from Chicago, said he had hoped to see the return of $200,000 he’d deposited with Yotta. Early this month, he received an unexpected PayPal remittance from Evolve for $5.
“When I signed up, they gave me an Evolve routing and account number,” Meloan said. “Now they’re saying they only have $5 of my money, and the rest is someplace else. I feel like I’ve been conned.”

    
    A bank just robbed us. This is the first reverse bank robbery in the history of America.”
    —Zach Jacobs
    Yotta customer

Cracks in the system
Unlike meme stocks or crypto bets, in which the user naturally assumes some risk, most customers viewed funds held in Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.-backed accounts as the safest place to keep their money. People relied on accounts powered by Synapse for everyday expenses like buying groceries and paying rent, or for saving for major life events like home purchases or surgeries.
Several people CNBC interviewed said signing up seemed like a good bet since Yotta and other fintechs advertised that deposits were FDIC-insured through Evolve.
“We were assured that this was just a savings account,” Morris said during last week’s hearing. “We are not risk-takers, we’re not gamblers.”
Abandoned by U.S. regulators who have so far declined to act, they are left with few clear options to recoup their money.
In June, the FDIC made it clear that its insurance fund doesn’t cover the failure of nonbanks like Synapse, and that in the event of such a firm’s failure, recovering funds through the courts wasn’t guaranteed.
Three months later, the FDIC proposed a new rule that would force banks to keep detailed records for customers of fintech apps, improving the chances that they qualify for coverage in a future calamity and cutting the risk that funds would go missing.
McWilliams, herself a former FDIC chair during the first Trump presidency, told the California judge handling the Synapse bankruptcy case last week she was “disheartened” that every financial regulator has decided not to help.
The FDIC and Federal Reserve declined to comment, and McWilliams didn’t respond to emails.
Jelena McWilliams, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, testifies during a House Financial Services Committee hearing in Rayburn Building titled "Oversight of Prudential Regulators: Ensuring the Safety, Soundness and Accountability of Me
Jelena McWilliams, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, testifies during a House Financial Services Committee hearing in Rayburn Building titled “Oversight of Prudential Regulators: Ensuring the Safety, Soundness and Accountability of Megabanks and Other Depository Institutions,” on Thursday, May 16, 2019.
Tom Williams | CQ-Roll Call, Inc. | Getty Images
Winners and losers
Things hadn’t always seemed so dire. Early in the proceedings, McWilliams suggested to Judge Martin Barash that customers be given a partial payment, essentially spreading the pain among everyone.
But that would’ve required more coordination between Evolve and the other lenders that held customer funds than what ultimately happened.
As the hearings dragged on, the three other institutions, AMG National Trust, Lineage Bank and American Bank, began disbursing the funds they had, while Evolve took months to perform what it initially said would be a comprehensive reconciliation.
Around the time Evolve completed its efforts in October, it said it could only figure out the user funds it held, not the location of the missing funds. That’s at least partly because of “very large bulk transfers” of funds without identification of who owned the money, a lawyer for Evolve testified last week.
As a result, the bankruptcy process has minted relative winners and losers.
Some end users recently received all their funds back, while others, like Indiana FedEx driver Natasha Craft, received none, she told CNBC.
Natasha Craft, a 25-year-old FedEx driver from Mishawaka, Indiana. She has been locked out of her Yotta banking account since May 11.
Natasha Craft, a 25-year-old FedEx driver from Mishawaka, Indiana. She has been locked out of her Yotta banking account since May 11.
Courtesy: Natasha Craft
As of Nov. 12, the four banks released $193 million to customers, or more than 85% of what they held earlier in the year.
The Nov. 13 hearing has provided the only public venue for victims to register their distress; dozens of victims queued up in the hopes they could testify about receiving a tiny fraction of what they’re owed. The event went longer than three hours.
“You can’t imagine the panic when it said I was getting 81 cents,” said Andreatte Caliguire, who said she is owed $22,000. “I have no money, I have no path forward, I have nothing.”
‘Nothing optimistic’
Evolve says that “the vast majority” of funds held for Yotta and other customers were moved to other banks in October and November of 2023 on directions from Synapse, according to an Evolve spokesman. 
“Where those end user funds went after that is an important question, but unfortunately not one Evolve can answer with the data it currently has,” the spokesman said.
Yotta says that Evolve has given fintech firms and the trustee no information about how it determined payouts, “despite acknowledging in court that a shortfall existed at Evolve prior to October 2023,” according to a spokesman for the startup, who noted that several executives have recently left the bank. “We hope regulators take notice and act.”
In statements released ahead of this month’s hearing, Evolve said that other banks refused to participate in its efforts to create a master ledger, while AMG and Lineage said that Evolve’s implication that they had the missing funds was “irresponsible and disingenuous.”
As the banks and other parties hurl accusations at each other and lawsuits pile up, including pending class-action efforts, the window for cooperation is rapidly closing, Barash said last week.
“As time goes by, my impression is that unless the banks that are involved can sort this out voluntarily, it may not get sorted out,” Barash said. “There’s nothing optimistic about what I’m telling you.”
Don’t miss these insights from CNBC PRO

    •Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway takes a stake in Domino’s Pizza
    •Wall Street is gearing up for an M&A boom under Trump. These companies could be targets
    •Inflation report shows market could have a ‘recipe for disaster’ heading into new year, says economist
    •Morningstar names cheap stocks in a sector that ‘deserves a place in everybody’s portfolio’
    •These 2 active ETFs have outperformed the S&P 500 this year, last year and over 5 years

WATCH LIVESTREAM
Prefer to Listen?
NOW
Squawk on the Street
UP NEXT
Money Movers
Trending Now

    1
    Bridgette Tena
    51-year-old earns over $70,000 in one of the most in-demand jobs in the U.S.—and it doesn’t require a degree
    2
    Jensen Huang, co-founder and chief executive officer of Nvidia Corp., during the Nvidia GPU Technology Conference (GTC) in San Jose, California, US, on Tuesday, March 19, 2024. 

    Sitting on huge profits in Nvidia? Consider these 2 rules from Jim Cramer
    3
    Kevin Warsh
    Trump might name Kevin Warsh as Treasury chief then Fed chair later, report says
    4
    Jaguar new logo
    JaGUar? Luxury automaker defends controversial rebrand amid pivot to EVs

CNBC logo

    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    Subscribe to CNBC PRO
    Subscribe to Investing Club
    Licensing & Reprints
    CNBC Councils
    Select Personal Finance
    CNBC on Peacock
    Join the CNBC Panel
    Supply Chain Values
    Select Shopping
    Closed Captioning
    Digital Products
    News Releases
    Internships
    Corrections
    About CNBC
    Ad Choices
    Site Map
    Podcasts
    Careers
    Help
    Contact

    News Tips
    Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
    Get In Touch
    CNBC Newsletters
    Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
    Sign Up Now
    Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
    Advertise With Us
    Please Contact Us

    Privacy Policy
    |
    California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Opt-Out Icon
    |
    CA Notice
    |
    Terms of Service

© 2024 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided byReuters logo
0%
 
10%
 
20%
 
30%
 
40%
 
50%
 
60%
 
70%
 
80%
 
90%
 
100%
