this post was submitted on 20 Aug 2024
8 points (78% upvoted)

Senior developer knowledge (self.csharp)

submitted 2 hours ago * by Imperial_Swine

Asked for a raise at work and got a promotion to senior developer instead. The thing is... I don't feel like a senior.

Looking to plug away knowledge gaps. What would you expect a senior developer to know?

EDIT: I got a small raise as well. I was told I hit the salary cap for what they could pay mid level engineers and so they had to promote me to give me the raise.

    12 commentssharesavehidereport

all 12 comments
sorted by: best
Want to add to the discussion?

Post a comment!

[–]LondonPilot 36 points 2 hours ago 

It’s not about what you know, it’s about how you act.

When someone says in standup “I’m going to add a Widget field to the Blob table in the database”, you will now be the person who says “Can we have a quick chat about that after standup, I think the Thingamajig column that’s already there does what you’re looking for.”

When someone says they need to add an external service to the system, you will be the person who may well have used an external service for this purpose before and can recommend which service to use, and if not you’ll know how to research it.

When someone is blocked on a technical issue, you’ll be the person who will sit down with them and help them figure it out. Maybe you haven’t seen that exact problem before, but you’ve got years of problem-solving experience which means you can figure it out more easily than they can.

The knowledge just comes naturally from all the things you’ve done already, and all the things you’ll do in the future. It’s what you do with that knowledge that makes you a senior.

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]Dave-Alvarado 7 points an hour ago 

Nailed it. Senior is about experience and judgement, not knowledge.

    permalinkembedsaveparentreportreply

[–]Snypenet [score hidden] 57 minutes ago 

This with the caveat that if you are on a small team that you support the other devs using your experience and you also serve as a high performing individual contributor powered by your experience.

    permalinkembedsaveparentreportreply

[–]Canthros 3 points an hour ago* 

You got a promotion without a raise, or you asked for a raise, and the raise came with a promotion?

Broadly, I'd expect a senior developer to be able to take something all the way from an initial problem statement to actionable requirements, at least within a specific problem domain; to be able to implement some portion of that solution with technical excellence; and to have a plan on how to divide up the work into individual tasks with estimates on how long they will take and in what order they must be completed.

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]TheBlueArsedFly 4 points an hour ago 

If it's promotion without raise, my advice would be to stick around for 6 months as 'senior' and then get a new job with better pay

    permalinkembedsaveparentreportreply

[–]Imperial_Swine[S] 1 point an hour ago 

I did get a small raise as well, edited my post.

    permalinkembedsaveparentreportreply

[–]Canthros [score hidden] 51 minutes ago 

Yeah, that happens. Just keep an eye out for increased responsibility without an attendant increase in pay.

    permalinkembedsaveparentreportreply

[–]FuggaDucker 4 points 2 hours ago 

Its all hogwash. Show me the money or make my working conditions easier to make up the difference. Titles mean nothing. 30+ year c/c++ engineer. Also, I worked a hell of a lot harder and put out more fires in the early years. Again, titles mean nothing.

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]binaryfireball 2 points an hour ago 

When to quit because mgmt refuses to shell out the clams for my steamed hams

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]x39- 2 points 2 hours ago 

Senior is just some flag without much meaning beyond that you are old, besides that you now will earn more money next time you switch jobs.

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]gpunotpsu [score hidden] 13 minutes ago 

Titles are meaningless without money. Ask for a bigger raise. Be ready to walk if they say no. If you don't force them to pay market salaries, they will not. Their nonsense pay ranges are meaningless and just a bullshit excuse to underpay you.

    permalinkembedsavereportreply

[–]BornAgainBlue [score hidden] 11 minutes ago 

I'm a senior developer, junior devs teach me new s*** all the time. Senior means you have more experience, More practical knowledge of how to apply solutions. How to deal with customers and their vague descriptions of their needs. How to deal with conflict, how to estimate your time properly. And most of all your ability to mentor juniors and help your teammates out.  I'll never be the greatest developer that ever lived, but everyone I've mentored is now a senior, and that gives me great satisfaction. You will never feel like a senior, if you do, you're probably delusional.
