Senior Database & .NET Developer
IvoryCloud - Rockville, MD 20850

We are seeking a highly skilled Senior Developer with a strong focus on MS SQL Database development to join our dynamic team.

This role will primarily involve working on a complex Grants Management Platform for the US Department of Energy.

The ideal candidate will play a crucial role in supporting the existing application, designing and developing new modules, and addressing performance and functionality issues.

A strong expertise in middle-tier architecture and extensive experience in designing, developing, and maintaining MS SQL databases are crucial for this role.

Requirements

    U.S. Citizenship. This is different than being eligible to work in the U.S. U.S. Citizenship is non-negotiable.
    Ability to pass multiple background and employment checks - federal and local.
    Bachelor’s degree in computer science, information technology, or a related field.
    Relevant certifications such Azure Developer or Architect Certification are highly desirable. 

Experience

    10+ years of professional experience in Database technologies, specifically Microsoft SQL Serve.
    8+ years of professional experience in back-end development with Asp .NET and a deep understanding of database technologies.

Responsibilities

    Work closely with the development team to support Operations & Maintenance (O&M) and New Product Development activities.
    Design and develop robust, scalable web applications using MS SQL Server and ASP.NET.
    Provide database solutions, provide performance tuning strategies, and assist with Database administrative activities such as backup, recovery, DR, HA, and indexing for optimal system efficiency
    Apply practical experience in custom, complex enterprise-wide workflow-based systems.
    Optimize and maintain the existing database layer and codebase, ensuring best practices peak performance.
    Participate in code reviews, offering constructive feedback to ensure high-quality code.
    Develop new system enhancements, Change Requests (CRs), and resolve defects to improve application functionality.
    Stay updated with industry trends and technologies to ensure solutions remain innovative and cutting-edge.
    Implement defensive programming practices to enhance security and scalability.
    Mentor and guide junior developers, fostering a culture of continuous learning and best practices.

Skills

    Excellent problem-solving abilities and attention to detail.
    Expertise in Advanced API development, Event-Driven Architecture, Microservices, Restful API, Version Control, Git, ADO, CI/CD.Good Knowledge of Replication and Failover Strategies, Database Security, Data Migration techniques, Scripting and Automation for Deployment and Transaction management.
    Proficiency in T-SQL, .NET, C#, Scripting (ex: PowerShell, Bash), IDE (Visual Studio, VS Code).
    Strong understanding of Advanced Data Modeling, Normalization and Denormalization Techniques, Partitioning, Optimum Indexing, and SQL Upgrade.
    Strong communication skills to collaborate effectively with cross-functional teams and stakeholders.
    Experience in managing and executing large-scale projects, and cloud migrations.
    Strong leadership skills with a passion for mentoring junior team members.
    Experience with Secure Coding practices, Input validation (SQL injection, cross-site scripting), User role-based access control (RBAC), Error handling, and Logging.
    Knowledge of Cloud architecture principles, Azure Functions, Cloud Database migration, and cloud-based SQL platforms.
    Expert in all aspects of agile delivery and enterprise software development. migration, and cloud-based SQL platforms.
    Expert in all aspects of agile delivery and enterprise software development.

About IvoryCloud

Ivory Cloud is a purpose-driven enterprise. We go to work every day driven to achieve for our customers, learn and master new skills, and take ownership in growing those around us. Through this purpose, we do outstanding, innovative, and high-quality work.

We are building our team with a relentless focus on bettering our customers, building personal capability, and investing in the success of others. You are purpose-driven if the following describes you:

    Driven by team and personal excellence.
    Total focus on becoming a Subject Matter Expert in whatever role you have.
    Flexible thinker who solves problems with both linear and non-linear approaches.
    Excited to be a part of a growing company and committed to helping it grow.

Benefits:

We offer a competitive benefits package including, but not limited to:

    Competitive salary with performance-based bonus opportunities
    Competitive Paid Time Off
    Training and Certification opportunities eligible for expense reimbursement
    Catered lunches twice a week at the headquarters office in Rockville, MD
    Team building and social activities
    Mentor program to help you develop professionally and personally

Job Type: Full-time

Pay: $115,000.00 - $125,000.00 per year

Application Question(s):

    Are you a US Citizen? This requirement is non negotiable.
    Do you have an active government clearance? If so, what level?
    REQUIRED: Please provide a link to your LinkedIn profile.

Experience:

    C#: 5 years (Preferred)
    Microsoft SQL Server: 10 years (Required)
    Back-end development: 8 years (Required)
    ASP.NET: 8 years (Required)
    .NET: 5 years (Required)
    Azure: 1 year (Preferred)

Ability to Commute:

    Rockville, MD 20850 (Required)

Work Location: Hybrid remote in Rockville, MD 20850